O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and have made the end through its explanations and through its declarations. 
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery". 
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so the science has perished and been lost, and nothing remains of the ancients' skill except small descriptions in the books that their hands have left behind. 
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the error and vanity, and understandings are closed off, and knowledge is alienated. 
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the cautery irons, and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. 
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for whoever undertakes this to be well-versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the arrangement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their function, both moving and resting, and their place of origin. 
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the deed is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of surgery. 
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously said, should beware that he does not fall into error and harm people; so I have wanted many times more than those who interfere in this science and abandon themselves without science and experience. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish barber who cut the abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands. 
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see another example that deals with a stone from a man of age, and the stone was large; it took away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it were cut out he would die. 
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another surgeon who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture was a wound; and the surgeon full of ignorance pulled out the fracture upon the wound as he could by great force, and did not leave to the wound any dressing, and left it thus at an end; and he commanded him that he should not unbind it; and he remained thus until his leg was all swollen and his foot and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it he felt so much peace and did not feel any pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But if any corruption was confirmed in a limb or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the whole limb was lost. 
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another wonder which caused a festering abscess to burst open, and then it inflamed because of the malice of its lord. 
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless it is in a suitable place where one can remove all that is corrupted. 
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dearest son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in several positions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger. 
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For which it is necessary that you guard yourselves so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your arms in confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave curable illnesses without grief; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen said in some of his admonishments: “Do not undertake a serious illness unless you are called foolish. " 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the fastenings of the cautery, and everything that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered and describes the shapes of instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments. 
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So that we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm of each complexion. 
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest and subtlest science and secret answers; many wise men spoke about this and agreed on it; and their words suffice for me little, because I fear the length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery helps universally for all complexions where there is matter, except two complexions: namely, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together, some say that cautery is of great help; and others say the opposite: that cautery is not good for illnesses that come from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat for a hot illness, nor dryness; and those who say the opposite state that cauterization greatly helps hot and dry illnesses that come upon men's bodies. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold. 
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word. 
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times by experience. 
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And by no means let anyone interfere who has not tried it himself and who knows by long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their outcomes and the space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, even cold and moist diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mire assembled and agreed to the cautery. 
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine. 
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come out except to the limb that is cooked, and it does not harm another limb unless it is named. 
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from one limb to another by moving away, and they bring diseases of the limb that are painful to heal; and by chance they kill the sick person. Fire because of its height and goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And these things I have found through experience and through the length of my service and study that I have put into this art, and they are based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it banishes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what times the cauteries should be done, and they came out praying. 
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful things arising are put beneath by the help of the cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for necessary pains, urgent and sudden, which cannot wait for the time until greater harm comes to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish people do; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are nothing but medicine which changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and it is worth more than medicine for its speed in its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its authority. 
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the illness and its virtue; and superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if this is not cauterized administered in the place where there is an excess of superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and some pain does not return at all; but this happens rarely. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is to be seen; but they do not believe that cauteries are effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then perceive well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish minds. 
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burns from a cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true for I have tried it and found that it is true in some men; and cauteries of gold are better than those of iron, as they say. 
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And nonetheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not stop until it is red with the color of gold, and it cools quickly; and if you heat it too much, it will burn in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles. 
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery which we have shown to be suitable for our work. 
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way may be lighter to find. 
dou cautere olivaire	With an olive cautery 
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two ways to do it because of an illness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses. 
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine, modifying the head III nights or IV, according to what the strength and age and custom of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient rear up again. 
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and have him place his hands on your knees; afterwards put the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle fingers will come, if it bleeds then cauterize with the cautery which is called "olivare," whose form is this: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the spot marked with ink, and go down and squeezing your hand little by little turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone a little; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; after take a piece of silk thread, and put it in soft cotton inside, and put it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter on top; and leave it on until the burn is gone; then treat the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed. 
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; and for this reason it is aided. 
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then re-shape what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured. 
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery upon it, and press so hard that one lowers it from the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their distaffs so that the humors may issue forth; and one must leave the wound open for a long time afterwards; then one must clean it and suture it. 
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it out; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and temperate for me, and from this one I work together with salvation. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain of the head 
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we have previously said, and it is not worthwhile. 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the head of the sick person is strong and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a spot as we have said above. 
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery where the place is called "vessels," and this is the place where one puts cupping glasses; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the shape.
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head 
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in one part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the humors are purged by purifying medicines, and other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, and all this does not help: then make cauteries according to two methods, namely with fire and with boiling medicine. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine are such that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into two pieces, then place the temple where the pain lies in such a way that you can put the piece of alum under the skin; and when it is placed, bind it well and leave it like this for twelve hours; then unbind it and apply crushed garlic on top, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then put cotton soaked in butter on it as long as possible. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the healing of anointing, as long as it is healed; and if you see that it does this with some burning medicines that I have written or dosed, treat burning medicines. 
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is made in this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as follows: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a beak-like curvature and in the middle there is a small appearance; and you place it on the painful spot and hold your hand and rotate the fire slightly, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is behind, and flows abundantly with blood. 
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in awe of seil, and put on the place for III days; then I put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called “cultellare”, at all the point, and take care not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old. 
de emigraine	From a headache 
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then draw a line half a finger's length long on the painful spot; remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut an artery and do not reach the bone; and beware of the mandible which moves when one chews, and let the nerves only be concerned with the movement and let spasm not come to the patient; and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear even to those who know it and are studious and experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it occurs in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold 
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has worked with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which this is the form: 
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is held, and you remove a piece of flesh from its root after you have marked the place for incision; and make ten points around each ear; afterward treat the place until it is healed. 
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth 
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cautery is none other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of illnesses; and do not make a cautery for resemblances that come from dryness and spasm of nerves. 
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of affliction that moves from phlegm and purges from the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a finger's length behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery place on the head of the ear above a finger's breadth below the corner of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on it so that half of its core is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the cautery is like the one we have put forward, but it is a finger's breadth more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a finger's breadth larger; after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed. 
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one between the head, and one where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before. 
de litargie	of lethargy 
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large herbs and purifying pills for the brain; then raise the head of the patient entirely, and put on the back of the head a plaster of mustard seed as written or treated in the treatise of plasters; and that is the manner of the cautery: if you do so as I have said. 
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy thus, it is good; and if it is not, make him three cauteries of the arm from the head descending to the neck, and have a space between each cautery of two fingerbreadths wide; and cure it as the others, and if you see swelling, and the patient suffers, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure until it is healthy; and let the cauteries be called “olivare”, as I have said before. 
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold of the head 
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have previously said; afterwards shave the hair of the patient, then make a cautery on the head and on each horn, and the back and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the deepest part of the wound is burned, then lift your hand; afterwards treat it until it is healed, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have previously said. 
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy 
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those who are subject to fits should not use a cautery fire except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies as we have said in the chapter when the patient is great and suffering from lack of medicine. 
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargles and mastication, modifying the brain often with good meats; then raise his head in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have said before, and apply the cautery to the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, he should be given a subtle cautery in this manner. 
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then apply the cautery of several cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis. 
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the superfluity declines towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then he should drink something by which the brain is purified, according to what is stated before in this treatise. 
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient; then make a good linen tourniquet, as well as the circle, put it around the head; and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be well held on all sides; after presenting the ointment, and knead it with old butterbur butter; and heat it over temperate fire so that the two can endure the heat; then empty the circle inside around the head, and leave it to cool; and do this to the patient once a week with another good governance, until he is healed. 
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see that you are cauterizing the wound by making several points with the entire cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery removes the brain altogether; then put soft cotton soaked in butter and jelly fat on top. 
de l’awe des eulz	from the awe of the eyes 
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fever first comes as described in the preceding section, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head and protect him from all moisture and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach. 
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands at the back of his head, and makes cautery above his head, and makes two cauteries upon the two temples if the descent of the blood is at the two ears together, or in one if the descent is in one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart with the cautery, and let them be long according to the breadth of the temple; and beware of bleeding from it, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it as best you can. 
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how you will stretch it; and never make a cautery or haste below the two bones behind. 
dou cors des larmes	Of the body of tears 
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in appearance above the head; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then he makes the cautery as I said at the beginning of the work descending towards the eyes: I cauterize on the head, and II cauterizes on the II temples, and II cauterizes where below the II bones; and if there is need more, then he cauterizes moderately above the eyebrow with a small cautery.  
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the body of tears by within the eyes 
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division and it does not profit, then give the patient three nights of cockle broth; afterwards shave his head, and apply a cautery or half an olive oil cautery; and apply two clavilis cauteries on the two shoulders, one below the temples; and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis": 
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cautery of this instrument which is called “olivare” 
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form: 
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you do two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not lift your hand until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	For hair which pricks the eye 
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to reddish brown, and they prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners; namely, by fire or by burning medicines. 
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in your lap; afterwards trace on paper a figure like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then he puts cotton moistened with egg white and parsley juice on the eye, and then heats the cautery. 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked spot by spot many times, so that the core is burned at that place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work are that you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs rise at the point of the needle; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burn is removed; afterwards apply an ointment dressing until it is healed. 
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened then start the cautery on the same place again, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the hairs at all. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicinal cautery is such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and equal, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, of each one .3 ounces, and grind together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread on the shape that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put on paper the eyes; and if the ailment holds in one eye only, then one should work on one, and if on both also; and put under the eye moistened cotton dipped in egg white; and the patient's head be in your hand and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press one time and let it rest all the times that the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for he feels a bite as of fire. 
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. 
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the place of the wound, and see if you see the paper raised as if it were raised by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked until your works are equal and your eyes are set; then put moistened cotton butter on it until the heat subsides, afterwards treat the place with ointment which is called "diaphenis" and others, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to guard well your work with great care so that the medicine does not fall out of it. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then resume the treatment on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size, and according to this are your constraints; and let not the right way be denied to him whose study is this art. 
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery 
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatments are of no benefit, then it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it according to this method. 
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your knee; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move nor leave his head; afterwards place moistened cotton in egg white or parsley juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is shaped: and apply it to the head as the shape of a quill pen, together with the way the cautery is shaped; if you see that it is pointed from one head to another, and if you see, it is also like a tent; but however, that which is shaped is better for your work. 
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treat the decay, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and treat beyond the bowel; then put a hot cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where the snow melts above the oil, so that your hand does not go crazy; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it. 
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery as far as the bone, it would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, start the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for 3 days; afterwards put moistened cotton on it with butter, and cure it with a desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the king will follow what he would bring in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Make an incision into the fistula, and then put in the opening a fine thread like this. 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of a .3. of lead; and hold your hand or pillow firmly, and do not let the patient move at all so that the melted lead does not run into his eye; and you must put moistened cotton on the patient's eye in oil or vinegar: the lead thus placed will close the fistula, and heal by wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is fitting to administer an incision to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the body near the nose according as it is fitting in its proper place. 
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips 
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times fissures occur in the lips which are called "hairs", and likewise in the lips of children. 
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small surgical cautery knife according to this form. 
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it hastily into those crevices until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with cerate until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat 
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and been suppurating and is old and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit: then it is necessary that you have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the hole or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it, and where the last place; and do so once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter. 
dou movement des dens	of tooth movement 
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it does not work, then put the patient's head in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery, whose shape will be shown later, in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside hastily, and hold it there until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and start the cautery again according to your will; afterwards have the patient fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and then spit it out. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the moving tooth is fixed, the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried. 
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth 
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or where there is coldness or wind, and remedies of medicine are not effective, then one needs a cautery according to two methods: cautery with butter and cautery with fire. 
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterize with butter as follows: you take cow butter and put the end in a spoon of iron or wood.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries together with fire are such that you take a piece of iron or wood, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the shape will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then refresh him well; and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery wherever you wish, according to what you have power over; and this is the form of the cautery. 
des scrophules	of scrofula 
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with hair so that the following form comes, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put softened cotton soaked in butter on top until the burn is removed; then treat the place with ointments and bandages until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures overcome the channels of the lungs, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines; afterward you make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come near the throat, and not to burn the heart but only a spot. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck and the head of the spine, and let it be the cauteries which are called "clavile" of which we have the form before; and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed. 
de la toust	of the cough 
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and sickness of the lung are of cold humors, and the patient has neither fever nor thirst, and the sickness is old, then make two cauteries on the shoulder blades in their hollows; and the other cautery between the two breasts; let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that is said before. 
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with all the cauteries which are called "points," whose form is described above in the illness of the ears; and let there be points up to XXX, or even more. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be at 3 inches according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason the cauteries are lighter, because you make three at a time. 
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder 
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. 
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is placed on their back and side; then lift the heart which is within the nipple with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two prongs, as follows: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart so that it pierces up to the ribs, and the figure of the cautery would be together with four cauteries; and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves: 
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And at no time is it applied on this nerve because there are eight cauteries. 
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery heated coals with thread; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted. 
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder blade, or many cauteries by pricking. 
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until they extract it from its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and accustomed cures are of no use, then it is necessary that the patient be turned on his back and extend his legs and arms. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the length of a denarius. To each cautery make it clavile and two cauteries behind the two ribs so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and have equal space between one and the other so they are not joined together when they rot; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they scorch the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:  
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and whoever will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking upon the stomach one point according to the quantity that you see necessary; then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "points." 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we have had before, as long as it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, as long as it is out of its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, it is necessary that the patient be purged upwards on his higher part; and make a sign of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come; and have a space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cautery; and let it burn only half the heart, and let the patient stand straight on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your wish is to cauterize these cauterizations with a knife, if you are clever and wise in the art, and be careful that you do not burn the entire heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and let it not come near the eye, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and look carefully to see. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient will feel pain but not too severe; and if it is in the membrane, he will feel very intense pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure requires the hairs, it is fitting that the patient be shaved on his head; and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which this is the shape: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I the cautery until the heart is burned, and it comes to the pus, as long as the opening is completely free; after the cure according to the cure of wounds so that he may be healed; and it does not suit that any should use this cautery except those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never run. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can work boldly, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone. 
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the cautery of inflammation 
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make several cauteries of aristolochia root, and in this manner: take a long aristolochia root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; and moisten it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize with it between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauteries one below descending in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind by one fingerbreadth; and one cautery near the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as the ribs behind the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but rather make it openly as in smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say that no ancient man used a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heated it and put it between the ribs, until it reached that abscess; and if the pain fled, as we have said in the liver abscess. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed. 
de la mice	from the mouse 
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse according to what we have said as divisions of treatments and it does not profit, then apply three methods of cautery all of which are good. 
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which the one manner so is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, in aligning according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to all the cautery, and let the patient often turn on his back; and another manner of cautery so is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is located at the mice, or where the ribs of the patient come towards the left, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After he puts the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then treat fire with the cautery, and thus he will have four. And if you see, if it cauterizes at all the cautery to three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has had putrefaction for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures previously said. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy 
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes". 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the shoulder, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be very close to the hope of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery uncovered for a long time to avoid putrefaction, and do not leave the patient's cure after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a key as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been previously stated. 
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet 
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in a person who is hydrocephalic and are full of clear urine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not insert it too deep, lest you tighten the yellow wax, and let the cautery be of this form: 
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make two cauteries on each leg at the point of a knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries exposed for a long time without cleaning, so that it may fester; after that, cure the other cures as we have said. 
de la menoison	of the menstruation 
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much greenness, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, or the circular cautery; and four cauteries around the navel, all subtle clavules, and two cauteries on the hips. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, burn him on the shoulder, and burn each one, and two small burns on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help. 
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids 
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and are old and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all behind below the scapula spot by spot in a triangular shape, and I cautery below the buttock II two; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the face, then on the face make I large cautery on the stomach, as it has been previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cautery clavile; and leave the cautery open for a long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the place so that it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul" 
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope the alum, if you heat the cautery so that it resembles a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the said alum covered; and leave it so long as your hand and the cautery arrive at the origin of the vein, where the blood cuts; do this once or twice, and if there is much alum, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward the cure with ointments that are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alum, it will be of greater aid. 
de plaie mal curee	from a poorly healed wound 
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or incision, which we will discuss in their place, then comes a disease that can only be healed by cautery. 
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula occurs, and it is old and has gangrene and putrid moisture, if you must test its depth at once with a subtle probe, and be careful that you know at once the depth of the probe. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After you heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tentacle has entered, and restart the cautery until the flesh, rotten and corrupted, is burned once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity needed; and beware of burning the nerves which are nearby, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful of these places, and do not make this incision except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not dangerous; after curing the place until it is healed, and if the fistula is clean, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the fistula is completely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the fistula is bad, and corrupts the bone at its base; and as one of those that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	Of the illness of the kidneys 
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes as rains, and from strong windiness, and does not take any pleasure of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the rains on one side and the other with the pointed cautery that we have said before; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help. 
de la vessie	of the bladder 
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously mentioned. 
de la marris	Of the marrow 
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make III cauteries around the vulva, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and II cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said. 
de la hainche	of the hip 
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the two bones of the joint are found, then you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the socket as it returns, so that the socket is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach. 
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, make three large olive-wood cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the hearts; and cauterize until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip 
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division, and the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-looking pills. 
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After making the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery can be done in many ways, one of which is this: you cauterize on the flesh of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cautery a space the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped. 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery should be applied to a dislocated hip with the circle we have previously described; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the whole hip and all the flesh of the thigh is burned. 
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done for sciatica when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds him, and four cauteries above the ankle, on the left side a point; and let the cauteries be knife-shaped, or burn the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the toes or near there, cauterize him where he feels the pain three points, or four with the cautery which is called "points". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, burn it with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the belly from which he had death. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on one and the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say about the cautery of the hip, this is how it is done. Make a tool like iron and let it be at the head as thick as a nail of a finger, or a bit less, and let there be spaces between them from one space to another with the amount of a knuckle; and let the spaces be opposite on two sides, and they should be like knots, and there is a handle made of iron well done. And this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the box of the bad hip, and turn it on the sound side; and the cauterizer once I cauterize and leave it for III days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of anointing until it is healed. 
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery very little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone who uses it; and nevertheless, it is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and where it is applied. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning medical cauteries are made so that you make the instrument at intervals in which the edge descends from the gate and is of iron or steel with a long handle and with two notches and between each the quantity of the thickness of a fingernail; and they are open above and below and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you place the box of the hip on the patient lying down on their sound side; and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; then put between the two circles of a heated awl that has been heated in the fire for one hour, letting the patient suffer the heat and burning. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it also finds a bite like that of fire; and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the buttock with soft water, and leave it like this for III days, and put butter on it as much as what is black from the burn is removed; and leave III days for rot to draw out; and this would be the last help after the cure of ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that holds firm according to what you have done in the hip similarly; and this is the manner of a hot awl, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot coals, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Where there is a small opening, so that the point of a razor can enter; and put one pot upon another well sealed, and put alkali and hot water and sweet honey upon it, as much as there is two fingers deep above the powders until you have well prepared it in your hand; and leave it thus until clear water and slime or the sealed pot descends, then take all that liquid, and pour it upon hot water and alkali as before.  
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very sharp and is administered in the soft work of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a remedy by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and praised it greatly, and said that no other remedy was used, and that he was healed at once when this remedy was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after. 
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in this way that you take some fresh and dry green vitriol, and grind it well with a bit of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for III hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make it enter into a bath so much that its body is warmed through, and make it enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and it will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of humors. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat feces, it helps a lot; and it must be done in this way. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the fossa which is between the thumb and the finger which is called foscicle. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After you take some dry goat's hair, and ignite it until it is charred, then put it on the wool, and leave it until it goes out; and do this again, and do not stop doing this until you think by feeling that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased; and this way of cauterization is called "goat hair cautery". 
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back 
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by similar matters of cold spread substance, none of these likenesses are worth cauteries except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter. 
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that after the patient has been purged of foul-smelling pills or other such things, you should make on their back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with ink, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the one called “point”; and if you see fit, make III cauteries or IIII with a medium-sized clavile cautery according to this form: 
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight ala when they rise, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes up on the other spines. 
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you are going to treat it, then cauterize it with a fire cautery according to this form. 
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery brands each part of the spine equally. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that when cauterizing around the spine with a pointed cautery, two or three lines are made and the points are close to one another.  
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not apply a cautery in gibbosity which is in spasm of nerve. 
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints 
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pains of joints are from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you burn on the face of the foot, then make a cautery with all the heat we call "a point". 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four times on each side, with olive oil cauteries; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand strong except until the thickness of a grain of wheat is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two points around the wrist; and if there remains no pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take remedies. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help. 
de la routure dou syfac	Of a fracture of the bone 
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the hips and it is recent, it behooves that when you see it cured, that he does not eat anything that day; and that he uses things which loosen the belly so that the feces descends from his belly. After this make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath as long as the bowels are repaired, and reset them at your will, and sign with ink below the rupture on the bone where the knife points, and at all a sign which is like half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: 
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it gives off little drops. 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and have the assistant hold his hand so that they do not return backward; and work well on the patient's thighs, and put a cushion and a sergeant on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your strength, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful subtly that the eye does not protrude when you are doing the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and so that by this the patient does not die, or other harms. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their bodies, and those for adults as large according to their measure; after III days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; afterwards treat with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for XL days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened often so that the boil does not protrude when he will go into chambers. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, work little, and beware of too much drinking and eating, and of shouting too loudly; and when he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the treatment of the waist in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly 
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When fistulas come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make the cautery hot according to its quantity, and burn a third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the break, and another behind, and hold your hand steady with the entire cautery. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb 
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its location, twists and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, start another cautery on top of the previous one. For this practice dictates that it should move to the limb closest to it, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed. 
de meselerie	from a mixture 
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The cautery is often helped by fire, and the same disease that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you want to cauterize it, be careful if the illness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and it does not disappear or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the illness, then make him 5 cauterizations on the head: one in the nape of the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the shoulder blade; and leave it long enough for the cauteries to reach the bone, and so that the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the thigh according to what is in front. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is spread throughout; and it clearly wastes away, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned above, or one cautery on the head, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on each elbow, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be wary of the nerves that are on the last bone of the foot, lest you burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do with the cautery, the more help you give and increase the benefit; and know that the sick person does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because their body is already completely corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing, apply flour of vicia with honey and other remedies until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be a small puncture entering the thickness of the flesh; then cure it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And one often does cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nevertheless no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body. 
de albaras	From white lead
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness which is called "albaras" is old, and the medicines are of no value, then cauterize a spot with fire, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and colocynth juice and almond juice, of each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and air it in the place until it is healed. 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of a chancre by cautery 
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a sore first appears, and you see it begin to spread, cauterize it with a fire cautery that resembles a circle, encircling the whole sore. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nonetheless the surgeons say that one should apply a cautery also in the middle of the ulcer; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen several times; and a better thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circular", as we have said in the description of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot move 
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes time to die, either because of the excess that it causes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you want to hasten its death: then the cautery maker surrounds it with many small cauterizations by pricking; afterward he leaves it like that. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery according to its shape: 
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that illness which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it behind in such a way that the course of the rot is relieved. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron 
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of sickness there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consuming of the limb, for it eats the limbs just as fire eats dry reeds. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery together, then heat the small and large cauterizing irons according to what suits the location of the illness; after cauterize all around until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains, so that everything corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the wounds cauterized soft bread with oil as long as the burns from fire are removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds generating flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then start the cautery again on that which remains corrupted. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this ailment has sometimes been cured with a hot iron instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for a hot iron in the division: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the leeches that come to the feet 
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the fire a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing lacking which harms the foot. 
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners. 
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot iron cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is if you heat the cautery sharp as a goose quill, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can encompass the nail on all sides, and that it has delicate edges; then put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for III days until it begins to rot; then make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place of inflammation by applying ointment until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer a hot cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or of wood, or a goose quill, and put it on the wart and the nail; that is to say, corns and warts; and put the cane on so that it covers all around, then he puts a piece of burning coal, and holds his hand well, and presses his hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the wart, and can find the hot cautery path deep down to the root; and let the patient suffer the bite of the hot cautery for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will pull out all its roots.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do one after another, until you pull out all those that are on the body, then treat the inflammations which breed flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling 
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from coldness of nerves, or from a quartane fever or another, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or IV on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery; let the trembling remain, and hasten the health from the cold sickness. 
des pustules puans	Of stinking pustules 
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes ulcers appear on the body, or stinking pustules, which come from corrupted substances. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it seems best when they appear that one should apply a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery from myrtle wood, with its point held in the fire, or from a long aristolochia root, or a lentil-shaped cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further ahead, but the superfluity from which they come is broken up and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut 
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to a boil, or in the incision of an abscess, or by the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to staunch. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tight so that the blood is calmed beneath your finger and no drop issues forth; then apply several small and large olive cauteries to the fire until they are all red; then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is severed, and put the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger and hold the cautery there until the blood is restrained. 
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps while you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another cautery that is in the fire. 
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do one after the other until the blood is stopped; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well held back alone unless the artery is large; except by one of the four ways we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature of thread, or by medicines put on which have the power to hold blood; and let it be tied and strained tightly. 
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will apply rest by tightly binding with cloths or putting burning things on it, or other similar things, it will not profit, nor will it stop it. 
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirror nor medicine present, he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press well until it is rested upon the wound and upon the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and rested; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need to cauterize and use medicines. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments 
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the ointments and causes and instruments and shapes of cauteries; and I have put this chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one can find more easily what one wants. 
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this one, it behoves, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution. 
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein and incising an abscess and in the treatment of wounds and in the extraction of arrows and in cutting into stones and similar things where there is doubt and fear and many die. 
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for healing. 
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If people come who are so consumed by their illness that they die easily because of the severity of their disease and the intensity of its malice, then one must fear them. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who give you their sense and say, "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is spiteful. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not work rashly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and of whom you can take oaths and pledges; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen. 
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to that which is before it, the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from the beginning to the end so that you may more easily find that which you will need. 
dou chief plein d’aigue	sharp pain in the head 
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at childbirth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too hard; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me better to leave the work on such cures. 
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of pain, and his head grew larger each day until he could no longer support it; and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture gathered below the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the workings are such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split a wide fissure in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spatula: 
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this: 
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are that the commissures of the head are open on each side, and a sharp pain occurs when you press it inside with your hand, and it does not answer you: then it is necessary for you to split the top into three slashes according to this manner. 
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the bandages of cloths and powders, he puts wine and oil, and leaves it thus until the fifth day; then he unbinds it, and heals the wound with tents and ointments, and lets the main dressing be removed, and gives the patient dry meat free of moisture to eat so long as the limb is comforted and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and its assembly of sharpness; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut there where the abscess opens, and empty it of its point, and make a suture according to your ability; and beware that you do not sever an artery; let blood flow until the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	from rheumatism 
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person has a sickness called “catarrh” in the eyes or breast and the sickness is old and treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort is to cauterize using copper and cauterizing the two arteries. 
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you have seen them, let the patient bend his head back; after rubbing the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then draw out the patient's neck with the whole cloth; then look where the vein runs, and its veins are behind one ear and the other, and they are filled up; then mark the veins with chalk, then cut both with a sharp spathula of two parts, so that the blood vessel reaches the bone, and this is done by the breadth of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it should through. 
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if blood flows continuously upward. 
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then cut from side to side and go down to the bone; and what it is necessary for the blood to put outside is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without a bandage, so that the pus does not come, then strain the wound and tie it, and cure with ointment until it heals. 
de emigrainne	from emigration 
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes and acute catarrh, due to moisture from tears and the heats in the temples and the old sode forsenee and similar things, and it is treated by various medicinal cures and none of them help, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have said. 
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is such that the patient makes a rear of the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is quite full except in some men who are too cold; and if it is full, let the patient tie his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some coarse cloth, and raise the place with hot water so much that the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the shape: 
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with tweezers and remove all the webs that are underneath from each side; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the point of a hook, then cut away from that part according to the quantity of the two heads. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not copied, it will not jump at all altogether. 
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drain the blood from the sixth hour to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and that blood flows; then cut away the excess which is between the two ligatures at that very hour, and afterwards, if you see fit, cauterize the wound with a hot iron to the bone until the flesh is cut; and this is a minor operation if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion. 
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is a help to end humors; for this reason it is of greater help against humors. 
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top; and when they are untied, let them be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and bandages, until it is healed; and if there is a loss of blood from the artery as much as you work, hurry to cauterize it with fire, or apply vitriol to the place and hold it in your hand so that the blood stops; and if you do not have this available, put your finger on the place until the blood freezes, and apply cold water to the place until the blood stops and is removed as needed; and what is better and lighter for the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with a two-part trenchant cautery, but let the trenchants be well spaced to hold their heat longer. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat. 
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a space of one fist's width, and then when you have marked to cut the two sides, and you place the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two; and they should be separated between the two sides because it is not soldered together at all; and this is the form of the cautery. 
des larmes	of tears 
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend into the veins that are above the temples of the head and no medicine helps, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and his forehead trembling as if from shivering; and where the veins are swollen and moist so that the hair on the paper is wetted, and the papers themselves are heated and scorched by the burning of the tears, then this cure is needed. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "cure contuse," and what you do for a patient who has this ailment is make him shave the hairs on his forehead; then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as long as two thumbs all across the forehead going down just below the hairline, and the other two as two ribs placed above the temples, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are by the sides above the temples; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the length of three thumbs in depth; and have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths for wiping up the blood, then apply the spatulum sharp on both ends which has this shape: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is behind the temple to the second incision; and flay all the flesh which is between the two cuts down to the soft tissue that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other one and then extract this spatula. 
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called “cultellaire” into the first opening, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. 
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp side toward the burning flesh at the heart, and the blunt side toward the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle fissure. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the veins as far as the incision is continuous until it reaches those that open to the heart; and then make another incision in the middle, down to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press the area for the extracted blood; then put a tent of old cotton into each incision; and put soft cloths soaked in wine, oil, and ashes on top, and watch that no abscesses arise; and on the third day untie the ligatures, and apply a large compress of hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used for treating wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	for the pain of the eyes 
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a sharp catarrh occurs habitually, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weaken sight, and papers burned; and hair falls out, and the head is filled with acute pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that those humors and this catarrh do not come except from many veins, and the mother cure which it has, if it is this. 
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to hold their forehead taut, then make a large cut between the eyebrows and another one down the bridge of the nose. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be until the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at meals; and when the bone is uncovered, if you wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sever between the two lips of the fissure and put old cotton, and linen tents; then bind over softened cloths in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until the flesh begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, which cause charring. 
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour flowers, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it in these wounds to draw flesh all around. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping up of the ears 
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that lodges in the ears is one of four things: either grains, or an animal, or a stone from a mine or similar things such as iron; or seed, such as oats, beans, peas; or something flowing such as water and easily flowing things. 
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is a stone in the ear or some other thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone and it discharges any drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with its extraction; and make him sneeze on purpose, and he plugs his nostrils when the sneezes come, and puts pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear above. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times fire comes forth through this treatment; and if it does not come forth, then administer extraction with fine pincers, of which the form is thus: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pincers, it is good; if not, then do extraction with an awl of small size; and if it does not jump out this way, make a cane of elder and push the head of the cane or hole of the ear strongly, and plug that which is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then draw it forth forcefully, for very often it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this manner, then take glue as one takes birds, and put on some instrument suitable for this, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw it forth. 
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump out from all of these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as an abscess hot vein comes, and spasm; and the manner of the incision is such that you make the patient healthy from the cephalic, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or place depends; and let the incision be as a crescent moon until you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a fine spatula according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction device as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When a sharp pain occurs in the ear, instruct the patient to first use a sneeze-inducing remedy, and then fill the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the pain is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps strong through this, it is good. 
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, light and warm them slightly in the fire; then place one or two holes on the patient's ear, and strike from below with another stone on the other side, striking it with another stone that is held in the hand. Do not cease doing this with stone after stone until the sharp point has completely gone out, and thus it will all go out; and if you see, take a wire, and put one end into the ear, and light the other end with fire until the thinnest wire burns; then repeat the same process with other wires until the sharp point has completely gone out, as we have said for stones. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel it, then use forceps for its extraction; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms that have burrowed into the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the section on treating distillations and the cure is not effective, then you should look at the ear in the sun: If any worms appear, remove them with delicate tweezers; and if none appear, take a cane of which this is the shape: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the finest point in the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then suck out all the pus; do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, then plug around the bone with cotton as I have said in stone; and if they do not come out strong as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the cutting out of worms, and you will find them where they treat distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, whose form is as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is of silver or iron, three holes are made below the small perforations, and above it covers for distillation; and to press inside the distillation with an iron instrument well made for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point carefully with cotton; then he pours his oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane is in the ear; then put the razor in all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or reached the ear; and let the patient smell it inside, and let the distillation be somewhat warmed by the fire thus it is distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of the ears 
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a perforation in their ears; and the same thing happens to men by tearing of a wound, or by a splinter entering the ear, and this tearing sometimes comes perfectly into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there appears a small hole in the perforation, and one can see it well. 
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes to you imperfectly, if it cannot be seen, is of affliction and healing in several positions; and where it can be seen it suits you to put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatumile from which the form comes: 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind the entire plane, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opilation is from flesh or cartilage of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and grasp lightly, until all the flesh is removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is embedded perfectly in the ear, then take a delicate razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. 
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the pulsation from which the patient complains of pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put a tent into the ear according to the width of the puncture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this no day while the wound is sewn, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on ground vitriol; and if you see swelling of the ear, it is necessary that you draw out the tent and insert another tent moistened in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, immerse a sponge and cloths in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which are found in treatises on distillations. 
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papers 
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This remedy that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then put on the place ground glass. 
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without cutting off, the cautery with a lentil-shaped subtle cautery and then the cauterizer after the incision takes away what moves; and many times they heal, when nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return. 
de la gresle	from the gravel 
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come upon papers certain things that seem like hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the operations are these: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and this is an easy thing to know; then make two large incisions, then lightly scrape off the skin from each part, then take it with pincers and cut it out. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot close it without piercing a bit of paper, do not worry the patient; and if the tear is large, sew it with a suture and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not force it, for ointments will soon restore it and engender flesh. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over and extend the hailstone with pincers, and hold it with pressure on one side and the other; and if the paper is removed by an incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is cut off, pour warm salt water and cleanse the place where it was causing pain until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes 
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is smeared on cloths of paper above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it grieves their eyes greatly.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the excrement coming out. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is such that the patient puts his head in healthy air; and then take a linen drape and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity it contains exuding from each part, then put it on him; and press with your two hands on one side and the other so that the exudate is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife a slit no wider than the wound you make for opening a vein; and make the skin perfectly smooth as far as you come to the exudate; and in several positions comes exudate from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat. 
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove then in one piece of charred cloth between your fingers at the fire, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed; and take care that you do not insert into the fissure, so that you do not come to all the bone marrow up to the eye, lest you bleach it.  
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the arrowhead does not appear at the beginning of the incision, widen the incision slightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that has remained. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it until it is healed. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there comes a hot abscess to the place, then let the care of soothing plasters continue until it is healed. 
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper 
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on warts other than those of nature and are aged, they harm them and cause various diseases such as habitual weeping and softening of the warts and albugine, as long as it is the cause of their destruction; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before in this chapter on cautery, or by incision and suture, or by canes, according to what I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, insert a needle along all its thread above it; and let this be below the edge of the paper where the hairs grow near these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs added, along the entire spatula cutting, from the large tear duct to the small; then remove the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then sign on the paper a figure of an anchor, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raised by the paper which is divided into all. 
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need for one to have a great quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make on all the spatumile on the two lines that you have signed and begin from the large tear to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle in one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all the fine thread of wool, and wipe away the blood, and let the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows be without any sticky things, if you see fit to do this; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four; then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and constricting things, for the paper will be revived at the healing of the wound and its joining, but the stitch is useless (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear; and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, with three needles detached according to the form which is here: 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take he who surpasses small strengths equally according to the form which is here: 
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread and put it in the shape; and put one thread near the large tear duct, and the second thread near the small one, and bring the threads together equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have said, then bring the two edges of the wound together by suturing, and care for it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hairs on the paper are converted: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in both is more skillful. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the canes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and put it inside according to what I have said, and then make II canes by art, and II subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile is; and cut at II parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what protrudes from the oil paper, and strain the II canes of the II parties formed; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which grows strained will die and be healed and carry, as long as it seeks by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, so the cautery has one force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is removed, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a fine needle and thread through it a fine silk thread; then gather the hairs and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another fine silk thread quickly, and tie the heads of the two threads; then put the patient's head on your knee; and let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for it is a subtle and small work, then push the needle all along the chase at the root of the hair chosen, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you draw it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and put it in the chase, if there are one or two or three or more; then pull out your hand so that the hairs come out all along the chase in the paper with the natural hair. 
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the hair below at all the thread that you have ordered there, until the hair comes out through the hole above it, and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will treat the hair and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, as long as the hair grows in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, you will accompany one long hair from a horse's tail, and let it grow with the one that you are leaving there, until it is elongated and then remove it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rotting of the eye 
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacratio" or the rot comes to the eye, there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by a wound or a cut or a cautery and similar things. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to work on it is that you split the suture and separate the edges of it and put flax tents inside and tie it until it is healed; and it is not right for you to use things in its treatment that dry up and restrict. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first; but it works with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose of aquile or althea and flaxseed are cooked, and ointments diachylon melted in any of the oils, and he wraps a tent, and cures him with this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are such that you take care that it does not heal according to the shape it had before; and this work that we have said is nothing but directions for this disease, so that it does not return according to the shape it had before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye 
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is below, which is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way to work in this case is that you take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct as far as the right, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh. Then spread the flesh above the entire needle and sew it up with a two-finger wide stitch. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is right, that is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits on either side within the paper; and let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has the name “I” Greek; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are affected below, from that which sustains the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then the cure of what we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or a seam or a cautery, it is fitting that you make a full fissure below the hairs of the skin, and according to what is said before; then separate between the two blades of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare everything in their power so that they may bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is fitting for the work and instruments is in several dispositions. 
dou soudement de la papiere	of the wrapping of paper 
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs in many men in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it should be done so that you put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and hold it with tweezers, as long as you cut what is exposed with a subtle scalpel, which is not too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient can only suffer from the scalpel being too sharp or the oil becomes cloudy; and let your incision, with which you remove the assembled area, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and the entire assembled area is healed, and sometimes in salted lye water, and lifted with fresh water and coltsfoot; then place a linen tent between the paper and oil, and put woolen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white on top of the oil; and after the third day use lukewarm compresses and other soothing things as long as it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the corner of the eye 
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles hard fat, and another which is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and one thinks to take hold as pincers, cannot be taken; and the one and the other resemblance begins towards the great tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is such that the patient puts his head in good health, then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper in your hand, then cuts the nail with small pincers, and stretches it above; then take a needle, and put a hair of horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and put it into the nail, and pierce it through the whole needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it above, and flay all along the side of the nail that follows the prunele and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the remaining part in the root of the tear to the whole spatumile subtly and with small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tearful so that by the incision the body does not shed accustomed tears; and sometimes the nail is stretched only on the fingernail alone, and on the thread, as we have said; then flay one along the whole spatumile according to what is its form: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the speculum does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the pupil is not pierced; and after the incision, drop into the eye a piece of silk thread, and with a collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed. 
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the lancet cannot enter, often this resemblance of a nail is cured by medicines; and it grows as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula slightly sharpened according to this form: 
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the splinter subtly, and if you see that it diminishes nothing and the razor approaches it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead and finely ground, and bandage the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed. 
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh near the tear ducts harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a thread and cover part of it, not all at once, so that fluid from tears does not come in; then distill into the red-hot eye a collyrium made of litharge. 
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows upon the pupil 
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, red flesh never grows, and it covers the eyelid and stays on the papers and is returned to the fire, and it looks like a rose of alabaster; and the works are such that the patient puts his head in healthy air, then he works the flesh, and all this flesh has suitable incisions for it, and he holds it with force; then cut the first piece of flesh, and go cutting with the razor until the end, and be careful not to bleed the eye at work; and let the incision be from the spatula that we have said in the incision of the fingernail, and with small forces of which one removes the scab, as the form after this chapter shows; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress or you put red wine vinegar and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye fire cotton with egg white, so that it is assured of a hot boil; and if there remains anything, and the pus rises above you, and you doubt a hot boil, leave the eye and treat the boil with soothing things for a hot boil; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as many pieces of flesh are added to the eye by this appearance. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you relieve the cure of each weak part of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member endures that work. 
des voines des eulz	of veins of eyes 
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red that are covered above the eye, and they endure to the sight their work and weaken the eye all days. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary therefore in the first place that you examine whether it is oil, where it is, and whether there is no other disease besides the oil; then treat the oil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, and suspend those veins at every corner according to his wisdom, and let the corners be subtle twofold according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be placed one after the other by degrees in the body according to this form: 
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then one should press those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after hour until you see those veins move away from the eye; and be careful that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very ardent in your work so that you do not cut through anything but those veins; and when you have done this, then instill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains in the sebum. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all this in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and he is sure of the hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until he is healed; and this is the form of strength.  
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye 
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and hot medicinal water as I have said before, and it is not healed, then make a incision on the abscess where it should be located, and drain all the moisture from it until the bone is exposed. 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, if it has all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "sharp chief", and is made of hard iron at the head end, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form: 
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two [hands], and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is healed; and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines. 
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the fistula is soldered, and flesh grows, and the body of the gut is soldered and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew nor become an abscess, and no bad accidents occur, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, if there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this method:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and remove your hand from the eye where you prick it.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the outflow of the eye 
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens completely and there is no clouding of vision or reduction in size, it is fitting that you bind the patient; then cleanse it, then apply cupping glasses or scarify without cutting to draw out blood, then put on the eye a linen made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and apply the plaster on top of bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough and double each one four times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then strain it with a hard bandage formed above, and resume the cupping glasses to draw out blood without cutting; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the strained eye day and night, and if the linen becomes loose, it is fitting that you strain it very tightly; then remove the linen after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not; resume the plaster and cloths and the linen and the cupping glasses until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	For the rupture of a vein 
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes to the eye's veil, then it opens, and there come forth papers like grains of resin, and it is wonderful to see; then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part, up to the upper part, then thrust another needle where the doubled thread is in the tear's part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the veil around it, and pull it well tight, then draw out the needle and put a soaked linen cloth on top well-soaked in egg white; and leave it until the threads grow together with the veil, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at no time is the wound restrained by the veil on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye shows great swelling, pierce it with a fine lancet that comes perfectly straight from the point, and drain the white moisture and reduce the swelling, and then extract the arrow as soon as possible. 
de la bowe de l’oil	from the gut of the eye 
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than bowel that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending fire, and it is not fire; and the manner of its appearance in surgery is such that you make the patient sit upon a prepared and upright seat, then take the head between your hands on two sides, and move it so that you see the bowel come up to your eyes; then be it ensnared, and do not let it descend and be relieved by light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is fire, and if the descent of the bowel is not even as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a delicate spatula and place it on the cornea, making a cut along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea, until the bow rises; and when it has come out, pour into the eye sharp hot oil mixed with honey, or sharp water or fenugreek boiled with honey, and then let it be treated with another dressing until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	sharp things of the eye 
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar things in the incision, and those which are needed to pierce; so that one may work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eye is left, or to your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument beside the crown at the thickness of a hair in the white of the eye towards the part where the smaller tear duct is located; then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously and turn your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that the almagda arrives at the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of the almagda be at the perfect measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye; if you see the bone in this paper because of the clarity of the corneal tissue, then place the instrument up to where the point is, and then express it below one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it stings now, let the patient see in front of him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a short rest, and if the sharp pain returns through the second path, apply force with the instrument. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put a linen cloth or wool soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg yolk, and bind it with healthy oil. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on a common poultice with plenty of eggs. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit," of which this is the form: 
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle spot, then apply almond paste, as we have said; and for the completion of the work, prepare the patient with the approaching doctor, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and let him be devoid of all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same darkened house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not right for you to do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary for you to delay this, because the humor rises hastily. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess comes, you must loosen the bandage before the seventh day and apply the remedy that soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, remove the bandage and put on its face a piece of linen to cover for one more day; and let it stay in that dark room. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he must leave the house little by little, and return to his usual ways; and know that no disciples should interfere in this matter. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his land they made a sweet almond paste which sucked out the pus, but I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing. 
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almond, so that those who do not know them may see them; and they are properly of almond: 
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the last one with three sharp angles. 
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh cut the birth 
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or arise various added warts, of which some appear like scorpions with many feet; and if there are such warts with a wart charmed of fire color, and also a wart in the form of good bone. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case of those humors which are sour and not putrefied, it is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands opposite the sun; and work on his nostrils, and pour vinegar onto those humors, and draw them out. Then take what you can hold with a fine spatula sharpened on one side, as long as you know that this humor is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything which you cannot take out, work on it with all the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if it swells or an abscess appears, cut it as needed; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the blood is dried up and all the humors are removed, then pour honey mixed with wine. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the newborn's work, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is bone in the bone above, which the instruments cannot come through to cut: then it behoves you to put a thread of linen a bit thick, and knotted by hand, and have between each knot a space of a fingernail or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in his nostril at its best power, and pull while smelling so that it comes through the nostril into the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the head which comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head which comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other as we are who are on the thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as long as you know that the new flesh has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the same place as before; do this for III days or more, until the ointments corrode everything that remains of the flesh; and then put on the nose a cane of lead for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, in which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and you guide it similarly; and if you see [it], make a closed cane, and let the instrument be filled to purge the head; and have a handle at the top to hold it when you heat the oil or any liquor. 
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh out of the nose 
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" is born on the head and grows and becomes large until it is seen as something to be looked at; and for this reason it is necessary that you cut it off at the beginning, and remove all of the bone, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it while it grows large, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, because when one cuts it there comes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut, then empty the patient and cut without fear, and treat the place with drying and restraining things. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn 
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then when this happens to anyone, if you look and see the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together with a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and remove it, and sprinkle powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put upon the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it comes out by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of suturing is such that you bring the solution together: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have let you know. 
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips 
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When boils appear within the lips, resembling grains of millet, small and large; then you must turn back the lips and cut upon each one, taking them with forceps and cutting in each part; then apply the place after incision with pulverized vitriol until the blood is dried up; and then a poultice of flax, and treat the place with dry things until it is healed. 
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums 
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a swollen lump arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to hold it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out; then put powdered vitriol on the place, or other astringent and desiccant powders; and if the swelling returns after the incision, as it often does, cut it a second time and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of deafness 
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are accumulations at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scurf which is ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and citron-colored and green, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling; so it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands, and his head on your knee, and raise the teeth where the scurf appears, until there is nothing left; and do the same with blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other blemishes, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what was at the first reason, it is good; if not, begin again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the razor with which one removes surface teeth has other forms than those with which one removes teeth between them; and these forms and others be prepared by you. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay the extraction as much as you can, for it ought not to be done; for it is a very noble substance until one has no excuse for extracting. 
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth pulling. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is a toothache, and they have the good tooth pulled; but nevertheless, the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the evil remains, for we have often tried to do this with these healers; and when you are well sure of the aching tooth, then you must flay around the tooth at all its edges; then move it to your two hands or with subtle forceps at the first prick and prick, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps; and let the patient's jaw be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert its point into each side lightly, and move it around as you did before. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and gnawed, then you should fill it with cloths, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracted; and you must work very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and return to the patient through the malice of the root greater pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to do as ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the bone, and don't achieve what we have said; but they often bring a greater illness through the roots that remain, or through the bone that they break, as we have often seen. And when the density is great, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if discharge of blood comes, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol; and if this doesn't work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments with which one must pull out the teeth first have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you are pulling out the tooth; and these are the forms: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large members so that they do not bend in the opposite direction, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold the pieces. 
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth 
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the breast, it is fitting that you put on the place cotton moistened in butter for one or two days. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the flesh is softened, then he puts in the tongs which are called "algefri", with which the head seems like a beak of a bird; and they are made inside like a file and that's its shape. 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is fitting that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a pincers, of which this is the form: 
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out because of this, it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come hereafter: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, of which this is the form: 
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are in front of it in relation to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large tongs, whose form is as follows: 
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many dense instruments are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master subtle finds by himself his own instrument according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of others, lest it breaks the chariot or the other bones, where it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit it, as I told you, and helps you with gestures. 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and strong to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you have all these instruments. 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course of the body and the form is ugly, and especially in virgin women, it is fitting that you know if the tooth was born after the tooth and is not in its right place, and it cannot be treated or filed: then the file; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and is of steel sharpened at the top: 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the knife bit by bit in my hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a part of the file as it is shaped like this: 
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the hand gently, so that it does not move until it falls out; then smooth it at the end with no razor at all, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it is necessary to file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt speech. 
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens 
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth loosens, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they are chewing without pain, and you have treated it with restrictive medicines, and this does not work; then you must restrict it with a gold thread, for silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that you can straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the loose tooth or teeth between them, as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again until the part where you started, and pull your hand subtly and gently, so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the head of the bone with pliers and assemble them.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, if you put it back in its place, again and again, as we have said; and no one interferes who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes make the shape of a cow bone tooth, and put it where the defect is, and extract it as we have said, and let it stay and serve for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the ligament of the tongue 
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this string which comes below the tongue by nature, one is born with it; or through an accident of a stitched wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous string broadly, as long as the tongue is loosened from its hold, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from stitching of a wound, then he puts in the hook and cuts broadly that tie; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is below; and when you have done it, lift the place with sharp rose water and alum, or sharp cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and the patient nurses each night so that the wound cannot heal. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it is of a dark color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then cut it with an incision knife, and make it from a fine scalpel, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the pus comes out to your work, put powdered vitriol on it until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw everything out; then lift the place from all around, and cure it with other cures until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat 
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come inside the throat lumps which are called "godath," and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dusky color, do not touch it with iron at all. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron at all, so as not to cause bleeding; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a white color and the root is slender, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first look to see if the abscess is hot and has subsided. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open the mouth and take the instrument between your hands, and press the tongue below all the instruments, so it is shaped; and it is made of silver or fine steel as a knife. 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue against all these instruments and see the abscess, take the lancet and put it in the almond, and hold it tight on top as much as possible; and don't pull anything from the cloths with it, then attach it to the instrument, which has a shape that seems like one force; and although the heads are bent and one against the other, they are very sharp and made of hardened iron or silver. 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then take pincers, of which this is the shape: 
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner; then gargle the patient with hot water, which is hot and easy; and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water in which cooked pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves are boiled, or similar things, until the blood stops; then cure it until it is healed; and if at any time other abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, cut them similarly as the two almonds. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say, an abscess of small sense; and it had almost completely closed the whole throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained so for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that he had to put two reins through the two holes of the nose. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then quickly, and put an instrument into one nostril, then the traitor was pierced through, and a large portion of bowels were taken.
de l’uve	of the eye 
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the humor descends to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below thick and round, it is called "eye". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not profit, and you see that the boil is soothed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and the one that is round assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of a yellow color or black, then you must avoid cutting into it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger upon the patient. 
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument of which we have made mention before; then insert the oncin into the eye, and draw it down below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you not cut away more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut away more, it grieves the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two tonsils, and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of being cut, it is fitting that you use something to deaden the sensation of fear during cautery. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and burning. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patient put his head in clean water, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned or the chapter of cautery, and confiscate it with a sharp, fine point, so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the end of this instrument.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have on his head a hair or where one puts the medicine, as the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine above the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine within, so that it does not descend into the throat, nor the bleating; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it upon the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it shrink and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton in its sheath above, until the cotton ignites above the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and let it rest for four days or five. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, so restart it, and after the cautery wipe it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and let it be washed with cold water, and cured with gargles until it is healed. 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calament and wormwood and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and add water and boil it; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot, place the instrument as follows: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it is of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be put into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, as long as the eye is mortified; then begin again often, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside the head a chickpea of egg so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for a chickpea of egg does not make the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else gets stuck in the throat. So it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all your instruments so that you can see the thing move; and what you cannot see and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it loosens the thing through vomiting. Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will come loose, and then you will draw it out forcefully; and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of plumb according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest all life depart from it, nor push any bone inside; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows where the thing is airy; if it goes down, or he pulls it out forcefully with the whole instrument equally, as long as it is pulled out. 
de la sansue de la gorge	of the bloodletting of the throat 
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes medicine is enough, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not profit at all, then look into the throat of the sick person in the sun, then press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, treat it with all its small hooks or with subtle tongs that are fit for it. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a cane with a reed, and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the end of the cane with a hot iron, and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And let the patient hold an ache all day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, and work the mouth open, and the throat in like swallowing, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the tooth feels the cold, it will die. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall back into place as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will come back without difficulty. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot where it has live coals and let it be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then you begin your fumigation, and the patient puts the top of the cane in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes up to the nostrils; and the nostrils will now run, and if they do not, you begin the fumigation many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and have salty things and such, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for them to urinate freely by this method.  
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinus, is such that when one can see it, it resembles tongs bent to enter into the throat; and it has a resemblance to the beak of a sewing needle, and it has the roughness of a file, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and see here the shape: 
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses 
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many abscesses are similar, according to what memory will bring after this in this book, and they vary in perforations and size; and there are two manners by which one is its appearance itself, and the moisture it holds. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the wounds which are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses on the head are different from those on the fundament, and abscesses on fleshy parts are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work. 
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one should not pierce, until the pus is ripe according to its maturity; and if to such as it befits to pierce when they are mature, and do not die according to their maturity, just like abscesses that are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints and it is left until it is rotten around, it may happen that the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; where it is near the fundament, pierce it even if it is dead; and it is not fitting that you pierce an unripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one near the fundament, lest it rot entirely, become elongated within, and a fistula arises; and it cannot heal in due time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation in a higher place or more dependent place of the abscess, and where it appears movable; and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all its equal parts where there is no weeping. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, bend it according to the limb. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is worth noting that you should leave the perforation until it is confirmed to be in complete digestion, as we have said. 
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it in front of these, the body will be lengthened by the poison from it, and is full of much filth; and perhaps harden the lips and its depths. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limbs may need. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is fitting that you make small openings in small abscesses, and large openings in large abscesses, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the heart, and cover it up; when it has become as soft as linens, and is dead, then it is fitting to do as one does for buboes: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and there are those that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angers; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected great pus, and you pierce it, if you do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain some of it; then stopper the abscess until the next day, then drain something again without delay; do this many times from time to time, until all the pus comes out; even if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit often leaps with the release of the bowels, and the patient may die by chance, and you are not to blame. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you wipe the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full slice, then apply strips of linen or fine cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes, then it is fitting that you put in each one a strip so that they come against one another; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn it around, then it is fitting that you fill it with old cotton or a linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then loosen it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bloodletting occurs during your work, apply cold and fresh water, moisten the cloth, and put it on the bleeding area many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the discharge of blood persists, then administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book; and if it is winter time, and the boil or abscess is very nervous, then you should put on cloths and bandages softened in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the boil is fleshy, then you must put on cloths softened in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and treat it as it should be, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter. 
des soros	of serums 
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small boils come on the head, they are often shaped like those on linen cloths, just like the spot of a pomegranate seed, and many are similar in appearance. 
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and others where there is moisture as well as pus; and if there are some that are hard and stony at the waist, there is no doubt whether the artery will oppose it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the hip is such that you must practice with every instrument which is called an "entromissoire," of which the form comes afterwards, what it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, make it pass through for a long time. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is removed, if you scrape without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, because it will return when you leave nothing; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day; and this will carry away what has remained at night. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the dressing again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that it does not move at night; then heal the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds firm and is greasy, then cauterize according to this form for a long time; and you cut off your ointments, and scarify it on all sides, and put all your treatment of drawing fire where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, then do what I have told you afterwards. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make an abscess if it is pierced, from the waist and from the cure as I told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cautery on a festering abscess is lighter, because it is made of little blood. 
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses are without moisture, and of these were the abscess that I cut or lanced from the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had made a cut in it, one would have done as much harm as cutting into a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or starting, for those which come at the head of children and at the roots of ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place possible, so that pus can flow out; and treat them as is appropriate. 
des scrophules	of scrofula 
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes it comes in other parts of the body, and they are many, and they are joined together. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just as the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofula. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that are so malicious they will not obey health. 
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	When you see a wound with good disposition to heal and resembles the color of the body, and moves from every part and is not inflamed at the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep; then it is fitting that you scrape it over, and flay it from every part, and spread the two lips of the wound with ointments, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not scrape the nerve nor the vein, and let the scalpel be neither sharp nor cutting so that the hand does not slip, and do not move too far forward lest you scrape what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you scrape the vein or artery, and that does not let you work, then put in the wound ground vitriol, or some powders that staunch blood, and draw out the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it; then look at your fingertip to see if any small scrophulous ulcers remain, and excise them and cleanse them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if it has a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not right that you cut out that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself without harm; then apply to the wound old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is fitting that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you know how to cut the root of it, and draw strong, and sew as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, pierce them where it appears dead; and pierce it as the one before said, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, if the cure with ointment causes charring flesh, until it is healed. 
de squinance	from squinting 
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be scraped; and this should not be done by anyone, because all the veins and the lungs of the patient are at risk for those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the two almonds. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to lift the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation. 
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cleave the epiglottis, let us cleave it below three or four circles with a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incision from the syfac, not in the cartilage; and those are suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to the whole inch, then cleave the heart until it reaches the trachea; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the pharynx, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the trachea which flows out through the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all up without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed. 
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely open and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the windpipe. 
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then place a splint on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are protected from death; and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in III days or in IIII. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, as long as it was clean; and I will tell you what I have seen. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young woman take a knife and put it in her throat, and cut off part of the channels of her windpipe; and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and although it had not struck a vein nor any conduit except the throat, the veins were strong through the wound. 
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound and treated it until it was healed; and nothing further happened to the maiden except that her voice became hoarse, and she returned afterward to her normal state; therefore I say that one should not fear in cutting the epiglottis. 
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat 
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of yellow, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural one has no cause. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat to us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which comes from our arteries; and there is fear, and it does not suit to work with great fire except in that which is small, and probe and search at all the entryways: if you find it as I said fat, and cannot go into any vein, then cut it off, as one cuts off tumors, and treat it with all its covering, if there is any point; and bind it well soon, and cure it as it suits, until it is perfectly healed.  
des nous	of us 
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are to us, of which I will tell all the resemblances; and now it behooves me to say all the difference that is between us and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that inflammation is heat and fever lasting as long as the boiling is not passed and putrefaction is accomplished, then fever and heat subside. 
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With new growth there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a pea, and grows large; and they are according to two appearances, either fat or moist, and many of them are of the color as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called “entromissoire”, according to its shape or chapter which follows. 
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of incising abscesses of us is that you take or the moistest place that you find in the abscess and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the core then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the introducer, and take care lest it leap out. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs clear, whatever color it may be, cut the skin as I have said for other abscesses; and if after cutting with the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty; then cut in a cross, take hold of it with forceps, and lightly scrape it from each side and keep the cloth where it lies so that you draw it clean with the knife; and if you cannot draw it clean, draw it piece by piece until nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains there for a while, the nerve will return many times; and if there is even a small piece remaining that does not grieve you, apply some sharp corrosive powders to the wound, and extract the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the nerve is large, cut the two edges of the wound, and cure it as those who are skilled in flesh.  
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or something similar happens and you hasten it, apply the place of ground vitriol, and leave it there for two or three days, until the wound dries up, and cools down the boiling of the blood; then return to cover what remains in the nut. 
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Look here at the forms of the instruments which are inserted, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three of these: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistulas; and they are also like the needles with which one sews charms, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those made of brass are worth more, and are better proven with black wax to encircle the curves of fistulas; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of pincers are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are pincers which have two bends in three ways also; and there are pincers which have three bends, and are also of three ways; and there are pincers which have two bends, and pincers of a single bend only, and are of three ways; and all this is necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these which one makes are cutting, and of such there are which do not cut more strongly than from one side, from which one flayed the veins, for this one does not cut the vein nor the nerve; and of these introducers are the small needles responded in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three manners: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one does not use them more strongly than in fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and angles, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling a flayer's tool, according to this form, from which one cauterizes blood:  
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at no time in the place where the veins and arteries are healthy, and at no time they return according to this great form: 
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so much so that they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to proceed according to the form of these lines b to g. 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound in stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast droops down and is soft because of its size as happens to women, then cut it into two ribs above it, by two similar incisions; so that one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or if the incision is not entirely made because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining fat and flesh, then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits 
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard kinds of scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture. 
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those who contain moisture it is necessary that they be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment suitable for this until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of a nature resembling scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the cutting of scrofula, and if the wound draws inward, then apply a cautery as we have said before. 
de la routure de l’artere	Of the breaking of the artery 
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is severed, and the skin above it is sewn together, then often abscesses come; and likewise it happens with a swollen vein and an abscess; and if the expert knows when it is due to the artery, the abscess will be long and straight; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will sense a pulling sensation; and when it is due to the vein, it will be round and appear red; and it is folly to cut open this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, at the elbows, or at the neck, and in many other places, and is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to remove the iron instrument and he who is at the head must also be removed, and in that which is swollen from an artery passing over the skin for a long time; then operate on the length as incisions, and beautifully detach the artery from its tissues, until it is uncovered; then put an awl under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and remove the artery with a double thread in two lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then prick the place that is between the two ties with a probe until the pus that is there comes out, and let the abscess be loosened; then apply the cure that draws out pus, until the ties shrink; then cure it with anointment following this one, until it is healed; and if the abscess is on the size of the vein, then you must hold in your hand what you can grasp from the abscess over all the skin, then put the awl under the place that you hold in your hand and make it pierce through, and have it a double thread so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I told you, or with a tie on one of the two sides with two strands of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads might come loose, put another awl over all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first awl, and remove the threads in four lengths; then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of pus from the heart and leave what is tied; then put a softened cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply cures of bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves 
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, they also come in nerves when they are strained, or from excessive labor, and similar things. 
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and it is a painful abscess, its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain; and when it is removed, the patient feels pain, and it is not perfectly formed like the body, but below the heart; and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one that is in the joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would contract; and the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with an oncine, flay it, then bone and sew up the wound, and treat it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	Large hanging boils 
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the belly and not elsewhere, a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms; it has delicate roots and thick heads; and there are small ones and large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had small roots, and were easily split open, and constantly oozed moisture. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied them and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six and a half. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist there often comes excessive bleeding, and if it doesn't stop, then quickly cauterize it; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision with the iron, take a thread of hemp well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the hemp thread until it seizes the artery, and bleeds through it without pain; and if the roots are large, fear to seize it directly due to the belly, but you can well seize half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to seize the tendon which is of a black color and poor texture and milky appearance. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of sores later. 
quant li boude ist fuer	When the arm is strong 
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of wound or fissure of the intestine, and is on the belly and in it are some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or from windiness; and if it is by rupture of the intestine and by the issue of the bowel, then the color of the abscess appears like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and it opens from diverse issues. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine coming out, then it is more diverse, and when you press on it at its sides it springs back up, and then returns, and perhaps if it is tightened, it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and through hard work. 
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraint; and if it is due to blood, it is recognized by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you about the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boueil, it is fitting that you command the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out all straight, then sign around the whole swelling; then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all the spatula, then extend the half of the abscess above on all the great uncine; then bind it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the knot be loosened; then work the half of the abscess extended on the ligature, and put your index finger in, and take the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligature, loosen it, and push the intestine out of the belly cavity; and if you find the boueil, seize it with the uncine, and cut off the excess; and if the artery opposes you or the vein, go around well then return to your work and take II needles, and put II strong threads in, and put the II needles around what you have done in a cross shape that you make pierce through; then stretch the abscess into four places on the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles and leave the place as long as it ripens, and let the dead flesh come off by itself; or cut it off when it becomes thin and rotten, then cure what is fitting, and heal the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place with what is appropriate, and suture the place. 
dou chancre	where a sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the resemblances of a sore, and how one must work on it with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and we say that the sore enlarges in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and they said the ancients that when a sore is in a place where one can shave it, such as a sore that is on the breasts, and on the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it all when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not right that you approach it, for I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone healed any before me. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the works, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him sweat if he has manifest repletion, then place the patient in a good place to do the work; then shave your ointments or chancres, and all the hair from all sides, and all the bones from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and press the area well with your hand or something else, and if the flow of blood goes against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then treat it with another dressing until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of the water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is erupted only; and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy which is called "erupted" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness than dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient strong of constitution, and he has no other illness than dropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: lay the patient straight upon your hands, and have the assistants press the belly at the end by putting the water to the lowest part below the breast, then take the spatuumile espinous according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be sharp from two sides. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At the point and make sure it is not so inserted that it can reach the intestines when you put it in, and you cannot bleeder; then look to see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if this is the case, you must cut into them with a three-fingered knife right under the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the three-fingered knife; and if it is for the mucilage, it should be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lies on the incision so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it through, and lift your hand over the entire spatula between the skin and the syfac as you would when flaying at the quantity of a nail or two; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the eighth place, and this is the place of the sharp point, then pull hard, and push the instrument out. 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is of iron or light artichoke, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side, III holes; and II on another side, and I on another; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision with which writers cut the quill: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Above the head is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, they draw now upon the instrument; empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than it befits in that hour, by chance he dies because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls into palsy, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick man signify, and his pulse; then draw the instrument and hold back the point, and it is held now for the heart which opens the pertus which is upon the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument the next day, if you see the sick man suffering thus, and draw from the point a small quantity; do this every day, and beware of forcing as long as there remains but a prick of a point. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient, and leave a lot of water in them, then treat them with hot sand or burial earth, and with a lot of sweat or bathing in the sun, and let them drink; and treat them with desiccant medicines until they are healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the straightening of the penis 
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it seems necessary as soon as he hasn't pierced all the sputum very subtly according to this form: 
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or pierce a small linen cloth, and bind it tightly for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the cloth and let him urinate, then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes will loosen the closure. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose opening is small, if it is treated with a clove of garlic, as we have said, it will enlarge. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the urethra in its place are blueish, for none are born who have the urethra at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot procreate because the matter cannot come up to the marrow, and this is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then extend the head of the penis and the foreskin as the size of a feather, so that the hole is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which comes many times, and if it happens, use the one who stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis 
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these come upon the penis and are an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are some malignant and some not malignant; so it is fitting that you take them with a delicate lancet, and cut and cleanse all, then put soft cotton on Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is malignant, of foul color and discharging, then it is fitting that you apply a cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the foreskin is over the glans, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the foreskin which is inside first; and when it is sutured, then treat it outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if you are not sure that the head of the penis is pierced, then blackness and corruption will come in the penis and where it joins; it is necessary to cut off everything that is black and corrupt, then bind an ointment of honey and flour made from pomegranate rind and vinegar on it, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a discharge of blood comes, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is to say, in the stoppage of blood, and in corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is fitting that you draw or pull from the penis a leaden cane, and piss the patient among; and when the hairs are burned at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is fitting that you scald it with a heated instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if this is a grievous thing to do, it is fitting that you scald it with a spatula at some point on the head of the penis and the skin; then separate them well, and put a delicate linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not burn directly. 
de la circoncision	of circumcision 
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a severance of continuity like the other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own volition, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for safety. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience. 
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greater part of masters and surgeons who did circumcision around the Nile, and with force, and all with one knife; so it flowed the heart for there are two membranes, and by chance if you cut upon that above and leave that below. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the pain returns doubled, and in the dressing which is made of two cloths, the tip of the limb is not secure; 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the modification which is made to all the length of thread I have found the goodness of experience for the forces cut evenly both above and below. 
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in I all at once; but let the thread be well twisted around the leather; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only making him tie the thread around the penis just so, and then you can make him rejoice in all the ways you can; then make him leave between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the children do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow on it with your heart, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has assembled there, then tie the place marked with a double thread, then tie it under the other tie; and hold it with two hands by the second ligature to the purse and the index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly lift the heart above and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood run little by little, for it is good; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a dressing glued with half an egg cooked tempered with rose water, preserved with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.  
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forceps for mundification is this: the two jaws should be held and sharp, and the jaws should be as large as the handle equally. 
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mundification is when the heart inside escapes at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, just as the pus makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tongs, and then cut it. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is below the glans is swollen, leave it until the abscess underneath is appeased, and lightly scrape it; if you can move it as you please, and you guard against the part of the glans, it will not harm in any way. 
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the place of things within a wound with powder, as we have said in our treatise on powders, and if one cuts too deeply beyond measure, and it goes above, it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed. 
dou retenement de l’urine	regarding the retention of urine 
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to obstruction of stone, or of congealed blood, or of bowel, or of flesh growth, or of similar things, that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and let his feet be placed upon his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient so that he does not move as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained towards expression of the stone above it, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which this is the form: let it be made of fine silver lightweight like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be a palm and a half long, and let it be slender at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of extracting urine is that you take a double thread and tie the head of it to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a stool, and grease his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, as far as it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the buttocks; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and feel the patient's urine coming up to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the one who guides where it goes is crooked; then pull out the thread with all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and let the urine flow; and start the syringe again until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved. 
des maladies de la vessie	of illnesses of the bladder 
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalding or blood comes to the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then make with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra," and this is its form: 
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the length of the catheter by which the medicine can be such that it plugs the urethra well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when needed; and when you see your medicines in the bladder, put the tip of the catheter into the moisture, and pull on the string that is inside; if you draw the moisture to the catheter, and then push the string firmly inside; if the moisture enters inside, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: this is it. 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is made of silver or brass and the head is higher; below at the breast or where the liens go; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture that you see to make a clyster, then tie between the two breasts with a good strong thread doubled, and heat the point of this moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the penis, and hold your hand upon the bladder with all the moisture coming, as long as the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about; then put a strong thread into these holes, and join the circle as one joins a dish, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes. 
de la piere	of the stone 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone and its extraction along with medicines; and we have said the difference between a lodged stone and those in the rains, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should operate by incision; and on the bladder, and on the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp pain comes from the bladder resembling sharpness in its subtlety; and it opens wide, and scratches the patient's penis, and it can prick many times, and then hardens; and many of these pains are foundational; and healing is light for children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous for the elderly, and it is moderate for those who are between adolescence and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the phlegm which is in the intestines. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often impedes the search for the stone. 
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and push and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the level of the bladder, and rises sometimes from its original place; then make him sit between your hands, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then seize it and touch it inside. If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut on top of the stone.  
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not crack at all when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it in its foundation and seek the stone; and when you feel it with your finger, if it stays at the neck of the bladder; then press on it, and push it out where you see the incision. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then he inserts the speculum cutting, of which this is the shape: 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and it shall be straight upon the stone, and your two hands shall be at the fundament, and let the waist have a cross so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perchance if you press with the hand which is at the fundament, it will go out without work.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If then there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must pull it up with the forceps which are also like a file at the head, in order to remove the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under it a subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot insert it thus, widen the hole of the opening, and if the stone is sharp, extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then pull it up, then cut it loose, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sewn, and a larger wound made. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For the patient two things happen: either he dies, or his urine comes forth immediately because his veins cannot solder; but nonetheless, you should exert yourself to draw it out, or to tear it apart with forceps, as much as you can draw it out in pieces; and when you have accomplished your work, apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on top a bandage moistened in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then put the patient on his back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if it rises very well in a place of oil and water, then cure it with diaphyticon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and urine is held back by it, which is known in such a way that it does not pass with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and make it rot; then lift the wound with sharp instruments and tweezers, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed; and it is fitting that every hour when you treat it, you tie his two thighs together, and apply medicines on the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is led by the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; then the remedy of what I say so, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for the cutting by this remedy. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this way. 
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron forceps according to this form and let it have three angles fixed in the fire: 
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the trocar into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the trocar in your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone on the other side; urine will soon come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is recently broken and jumps out with the urine, and is painful for the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason that stops it, tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make a rod in place of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women 
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does, the cure is grievous, and is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself at the mirrors, even when she is chaste. 
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper set than the stone of man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessities demand this, it befits you to take a midwife well knowing, and rarely does one find her, and if you do not find one, then take no less subtle a cast; and present her with a wise woman skilled in the lives of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do what you command her regarding the inquiry of the stone; and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it befits you to thrust your finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain it under her finger, and recommend that she thrust her finger or hand into the sick woman, and press with her left hand on the bladder formed. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it should be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place it on the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the buttock, where it is moved and felt, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her foot above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first; then put the knife into the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have horns. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the resemblances to know the issue 
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood comes, put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your work, while the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work; and if the blood comes, and it is from the artery which is cut, put powder on the place and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not start again this, and leave the stone and do not pull at it, lest the patient should die by chance; then treat the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia 
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is below the heart of the egg and contains the yolk; and it is called “syfac”, and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the egg between the white syfac that we have said; and this will not peck. 
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and its matter is spread. 
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never if it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a declining color to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, it is a returning abscess, I put long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the very cloth, then the abscess is rejoined with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, then he feels it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you should examine all the instrument, whose form was described previously. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, which comes after the introducer, judge what is inside. 
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be well bled according to our power and the repletion of his body; then lay him on his back, on something a hand high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on his right side, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the breastbone; then take the scalpel sharp, and cut the skin of the breastbone among them from below up to the nipple, and let your incision be all straight in dividing the skin of the breastbone until the white flesh appears; and pare it subtly according to our power; then pierce the white flesh full of pus with a large opening, and draw out all the pus, and then put on your ointments, and stretch the white flesh upward; and do not touch the heart of the breastbone, but only the white flesh; cut all or in pieces at once its side subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return with pus; and if the pus comes out forcefully during your work, put it back in its place when you have completed the work on the white flesh; then bring together the two edges of the heart of the breastbone with a suture, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the cord at all the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the sharp point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened in rose oil; and put another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put on the two sides, and put doubled cloths on top, and bind it all with a bandage according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and employ wool yarn according to this appearance and let them be assembled by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one of the points takes upon the fundament up to the back, and the other at the side of the hip; and the other two chiefs upon the two angles, and let all the restraint be assembled in the loop of the breeches; and no medicine is this branch of cautery instead of an iron blade, and it is that you take a sharp surgical cautery and cut the skin of the testicles, and be warmed as we have said so that the white membrane containing the point is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the membrane with one stroke, and scar it with this sharp hot cautery. 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in all the ways that you can, so long as you scrape everything; and beware that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and keep guarding against the loss of blood, and milder than the works of surgery; and if anything opposes you, or an abscess grows or there is a loss of blood or other thing, then cure what opposes you, according to what has been said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure because of its horror, then make a perforation as I tell you, and know that when you are quite certain by the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is there, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part across the entire span, making the perforation as long as the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the humor can flow out; then put cotton on the spot and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining humor, then treat it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the humor to escape at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument with which one treats the humor in dropsy, the shape of which is shown above, and widen the opening of the wound and know that the humor will return and collect after six months or thereabouts, and when it has collected as before, then the patient will pass their days.  
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles 
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch, fear brings about several situations, for which it seems to me that you would best leave it; and I will tell you the work and the resemblances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and similarly to the testicles; and this is by many causes. 
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known that an abscess arises from excessive sour and sharp humors, which are spread throughout the body, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is a troublesome abscess; and sometimes one finds a grievous abscess, hard and rough, and dark in color, and at times it comes from a new artery, or swelling of a vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a wound of an artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not fitting that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of vein swelling are known by their disposition to the touch of the fingers, and one can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on the other chariots; and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then raise the egg above, and draw a line through the white syfac, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the pus is already dried up with these sharp objects, then you must draw out the pus and the cup; and if it is airy in the skin or that which is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all this matter and round the cup. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is or place behind, it behooves that you cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said. 
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the thighs 
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a boil, with the softening of the pus, and the patient groans when he moves; and the cure for this disease is as dangerous as the one before, nevertheless we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory from his testicles down to your thighs, to all the vessels which are near the penis, and tie them up, holding the masters, and spreading them out; then cut with a sharp scalpel at a crosswise place through the vessels as long as they are uncovered, and then flay from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then he puts a needle where it has a double thread, and ties it at the first place where the vessel came out, and ties it straight to the other end; then he cuts in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted humors; then cure the wound like the others where one introduces the bowel, so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the testicles; for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come visible, it is necessary to draw the testicles to all the vessels; so that the penis does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.  
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the thigh bone 
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture is by section that comes or from a tear, or the stretching above the belly in the part of the groin, for which the intestine descends from this tear to one of the thighs; and this tear is either from the tear, or from the stretching of it, and these two manners come from many causes: either from percussion, or from a jump, or from a brawl, or from lifting a heavy thing wrongly, and by similar things; and the signs when it is from the stretching of the tear, are that it happens little by little, in long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the bottom, because the tear pulls the intestine.  
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the fistula, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses appearing underneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the intestine's exit and the body being outside the fistula. 
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never separate the intestines with a knife, and they are held there, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed. 
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron out of fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of working is such that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine with his hand into the wound, if he can reach it; then be propped up on his neck between your hands and lift the thighs; then extend the heart above, and cut all the skin of the testicles from the length; then put one-inch levers of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and so that the bones can come out; then flay the white fascia which is below the skin of the testicles, until the white fascia hard is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger in what follows the testicle, in what is between the white fascia which is under the skin of the egg, and the second fascia; and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second fascia; then push with your right hand into the heart of the testicles, and extend the white fascia upward to your left hand, and lift the testicle toward all the fascia towards the waist; and instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upward, and untie what is behind the ligature; and take with your fingers if there is any intestine entangled or white fascia hard, and if you find something, put it in the belly below; then take a needle where it has a large thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the fascia which is after the skin of the testicles; after the waist, then cut the ends that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fascia, of which we have said that it is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of two parts; then envelop the ends of the threads, and bind them in two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, so that no abscess comes; and place the ligature according to the first ligature long two fingers from it, and after these two ligatures leave the fascia which is below the heart of the testicles a finger's breadth wide; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is below the skin of the testicles, as much as the sinews and veins, as we have said before; then apply wool moistened with oil, and place it on the wounds, and administer the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is it cauterized with white flax as we have said, after the incision, for fear of stopping blood flow. 
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the ligature until it falls out by itself; and if it is delayed in falling, it should be removed with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls out; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia 
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure by iron. 
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made just as a branch which is joined together with a vine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision on either side lightly below; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of the one who operates, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the angles, as we have said, and opens the veins; and no intestines should be drawn out of the joints, and if some are drawn out, it is a bad sign, and it repairs every hour; and nevertheless, if it stays too long in this state, the wound or fistula grows, as long as the intestine is drawn out; and this happens by the extension of the fistula which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swells the veins and opens; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflamed with a large incision according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the fistula which is below the skin than usual, then take the red-hot iron and put it on the appearing place of the fistula; and press it hard against the belly, then cut the two veins appearing under the fistula on the head of the iron, and cut both; then extract the head of the iron, and do not cauterize the fistula nor stretch the one or the other, as I have told you in the cure of the rupture of intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, let the patient cleanse and care for the wound until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The facial artery is constricted, and there is no visible opening in the wound; the cautery is gentler in this place, and closer to safety. 
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles 
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the cords that are inside are softened, and it is made to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin above the natural skin; then bring together the two edges with a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and heal like the other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread. 
dou chastrement	punishment 
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castration is forbidden in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of it in this book; but it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the patient must be able to answer when asked and understand the treatment; and the other is because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In those that we do by attraction, have the animal sit in hot water, until the tail is softened and drooping; then take it with your hand, as long as they are put back in place and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of size: it is fitting that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut on each egg at one cut, when you have well skinned them; and leave no spot where the syfac or the subtle syfac which are upon the vessels; and this manner of castration is milder than that which is done by attraction, for in attraction there remains perhaps something of the testicles, by which the beast desires luxury; then heal the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites 
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodism is according to two manners like men: one if it appears between the two testicles as the figure of nature of a woman, or if he has hair, and sometimes urinates in front. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another method is for women, and it has on top a dagger as well as a rod and two points. 
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is such that you cut off all protruding parts and treat them as other wounds. In the second manner, men whose urine escapes through the skin of their testicles have no cure. 
de la tentigene	Of the tenting needle 
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A wen is a fleshy growth added on the natural part, so unsightly to behold; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you hold the superfluity of the tentorium in your hand or on your fingers, and press it lightly; and do not press too hard, lest blood flow, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and on another cheek that is born at the mouth of the wound, and apply it, and by chance it jumps out, and according to its appearance like a cow's udder, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cupping it, as we have said in the previous section, and treat it until it is healed. 
de erratique	Of wandering 
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that has come; or it is by chariot added, or through subtle artifice or species, and it is made perfect in the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be; and it hinders conception, and childbirth, and perhaps having flowers; and the knowledge of these is by looking at the bail. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the splinters are close together, appearing either at your two thumbs or on your right side.  
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a soft syfac and it is close to the two lips, do this: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two lips as much as possible so that the soft syfac is gone and the swelling subsides; then take wool, moisten it with oil, and place it on the area, and let the woman stay at home each day so she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphasis is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with a speculum resembling a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stab wound is from a chariot wheel, suspend it with thread and soap; and have medicines steeped in blood, such as agaric, dragon's blood, incense, mixed abundantly with egg yolk; then apply a splint of lead wide enough so that the wound cannot close; and let it remain for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a boil comes, if it needs to be covered according to this manner, unless they are festering boils. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an inflamed abscess which is in the marrow, one should not touch it with fire. 
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids 
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without a rupture and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; and we have said in the division the appearances of others, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and fistulas when they are embedded perfectly in the anus and do not appear to the touch unless it is cured by iron.  
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marshes, one can feel, are those one can cure. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary then that you place the woman in a cold house, and then take the cautery with tongs, and hold it to its roots, then sprinkle powder of medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice on her back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it extinguishes, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have them apply cupping to the back and breasts without drawing blood; then take flax, moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, treat the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a harsh head, so you must cover it as I said for the thelul; and then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the sea 
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the flesh, such as sores and festering abscesses and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore it is fitting that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it rest until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring together his feet at the sides of the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then turn him towards the right side, and he will adjust the instrument with which one operates on the mouth of the abscess, from which the shape will come; and it is fitting that when you see him adjusting this instrument, you should insert the point first to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go any deeper than it should, and so that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is fitting to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is fitting that he put the horn of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and you press it with your hand gently, if it should be covered at its head, cover it with spatumile leaves; and when the bowels are emptied, it is necessary that you place in the wound tents softened in rose oil or in verdigris oil; and put the tent firmly from the wound to the edge of the marsh, and put outside on the marsh and on the handle clean linen softened in water, whether they be cooked or uncooked. Then cure afterwards for two days with anointing suitable to it, until it is healed; and never lift the marsh and the wound by clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and long aristoloche that are cooked; then return to anointing.  
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the marsh, it befits you to guard against cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	From childbirth 
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs if she sees the woman hasten down, and desire to smell the air: then hurry the child so that it will be born quickly; because when it descends upon its head, the afterbirth comes with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press her belly lightly so that the child is born quickly.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and the body or the shoulders, and the hands come up, or it comes up on its belly, or often, and is converted by chance off its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out on its own through natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle where women hold her; and boil oil or fenugreek, and then pour the broth between her thighs with a small spatula which has this shape: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the second skin and cut to its nail until the moisture that is in it comes out; and take the belly of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman a clyster of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil; then make her drink and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if now the child is delivered. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out forcefully, it is necessary that you gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up high; then overturn the stool to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the overturning; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the infant is dead, cut the woman's hands with the knife which has already been placed there, and extract the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the delivery of a child onto its feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, it is necessary to push upward; and then turn it little by little until it is straight; then take it by the feet and extend it little by little. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to the thighs, if he is ordered to take it, and he makes him sneeze from condition; if the jump is strong, if God wills. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural form. 
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light. 
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, say that you take a plaster of aloe, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and defuse this ointment, then make her sit in lukewarm water up to below the ribs; and when she is softened below, give her a suppository of myrrh, and place it below, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child jumps now. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child upon its knees 
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child arrives in this form, if it puts its hands on its chest little by little; then let it be swaddled up to its neck, and hang its feet down, and let it lie on its back off the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then take its hands and place them on its belly, and remove the cushions from beneath it so that it is fully exposed downwards; and if the child does not jump, take its feet and move them around, then move its belly upwards, then push its hands up; and lift the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold onto it as the child rises. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the delivery of a child who comes out with one hand extended 
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to try to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, have the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed and straighten her legs; then administer the muscilage that I have described; and if she does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and set the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold herself as long as the child is delivered. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child upon its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned toward its mother's back 
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is fitting that the patient hold their hand, then turn it little by little and lift it lightly; and when it is equalized, put on the natural muscilage of elder and oil, as we have said, then instruct them to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make them sit on a seat and instruct them to grip; and make them sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same way to all the following  
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes strong in this manner to the whole secondine, so bind the secondine to your finger, as long as the moisture is emptied; and if the child can breathe on its face and on its neck, then bind the child from the elbow, so that it is not held back, and the child dies; then put the child inside as long as you have placed it as it should be, and order the woman to never take hold of it again: then draw it lightly. 
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins 
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. 
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live, if you call them names; I know that they should be multiplied, and are delivered by the syfac which devises them, which is tied to the shoulder; and sometimes they issue naturally as all those below, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue grievously, so the cure as we have said, and be the bail subtle, and make quickly and lightly that which it does; and make thus as it is worth moving towards safety. 
de plusors enfans	of several children 
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff knows all this, for if such things happen by chance; then do according to what is right. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child 
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and has no accident or fear of death; it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised; and let the midwife hold her down in two places, or tie her to the bed so that she is not thrown about during the delivery of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils with a mixture of altea and fenugreek and flaxseed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these mixtures; then gently insert them into the womb; then choose the place where she inserts the ointments to be suitable for this purpose, and take care that if the child is attached it descends on its head; then insert the ointments into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or in the throat or near the ribs; and if the delivery is on foot, insert them at the heel or side; and it is necessary that she hold the ointment in her right hand, and place the curve between the two fingers of her left hand, and insert it gently with all her hand, and insert the ointment into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the ointment: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert the other forceps, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then extend them equally by moving them from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the forceps be toothed to hold it, as this is its form: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, anoint the bandage with some of its oil, and put it into that part, and draw out the other part; and if none remains, put this ointment or higher up, and do this until it all comes out. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other and it cannot be brought back because of tightness, then you must wrap it on a cloth until it is all raised; then apply a cup at the joint of the palm or to the knife, and so you must do with the other hand and the two feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in its exit, or if it has a sharp point, then you must put the spatumile espinous between your fingers and cut the head and extract the point; or you can grind it with the instrument which is called "almidach," from which form comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one; and in the same way do if the child has a large head naturally; and then draw the bones with the tongs, and if the head jumps out and is extracted by force, it should be split, as long as the moisture which is in its bad exit goes out; and if it cannot go out, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the suction is light, and straightening at the mouth of the breast is light. 
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is three in the belly or breast, it befits that you extract it at the draping wrapped upon the hand; and making the belly or breast, so long as the moisture which is therein runs; and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then put the bail of his hand emparfonted from the marrow, and drag it to the mouth of the marrow; then put the oncin one or two, and draw it strong; and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess which has come therein, then it does not befit to work, but rather administer moist and fatty things; and administer plasters, and seice in acute softening and moistening. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then follow what we have said about the living child; and if you cannot do so, then treat it in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if he administers what we have said in abscesses which come in the marshes; and if bloodletting comes, it should be put in a sharp restraint, and administer other cures to him. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other also died. 
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess appeared on his arm, and it swelled so much that it burst, and he began to have a great discharge. 
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not suture the wound. 
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and an bone came out, and after several days another. 
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled greatly, for this belly has no bone. 
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones of a dead child. 
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wished the wound, and drew out the bones with my hands, as long as the woman was in a better condition; and I left the woman for a long time like that, and there was then a little piece of bone from its place; and I have not remembered this chapter except for this reason, that when masters find a strange thing, they may know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the marrow to its place 
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, with which we weigh books; and at two turns are the two heads of the two links. 
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor and made of ebony or boxwood. The mouth should be made of wood one and a half finger widths wide, and the edges of the trees should be one palm and a half long. Between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which should be fastened on one side and the other, a half palm long or a finger more. These two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marris to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pincers; and it shall have two jaws with two adjustments, as you see, a palm's length long and two fingers wide; and when you see the woman open her vulva for the whole instrument, have her sit upon her bed, feet dangling and legs open, then insert the two adjustments together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand along the whole instrument as you did with the pincers alike, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the vulva, until the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all assembled, and its likenesses are multiplied; and when the master has prepared them, the work is quicker, and higher are the men by their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare your instruments, their necessity is inexcusable. 
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze forcefully, while extracting her hands from her mouth and nose; and if it comes out this way, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the ulcer, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water on the fire; then put a cane or tube from the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the ulcer, and suck until the vapors go inside the ulcer; then make it sneeze as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second bone jumps quickly. 
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not strong, instruct the patient to wet their left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then put it into the wound, and want the second one; and when they have found it, grasp it and slowly extend it straight so that the marrow does not break during extraction; but you must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull. Then it will come out and become detached. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the mare is tight and contracted, we have said the cure is sneezing, and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful that you do not go astray; but it is necessary for him who is at the mouth of the mare, that you bind him to the thigh of a woman, then cleanse him with tetrafarmaca ointment; if he recovers and returns, and will come strong; but in any case, when he recovers there will be bad odor in the stomach and head, and it will harm the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is fitting then suitable fumigations for this one: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to hold back her flowers and her monthly cycle is this: 
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it looks like a cane, and you put the subtle head in the fire, and the wide jaws over the fire; and let there be fumigation over the coals, until the louse is consumed, then begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation 
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but have it stopped up by a subtle membrane; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her needle, and not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and she must be careful that she does not touch it; then she puts on linen soaked in wine and oil, and then heals it with ointment until it is healthy. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay put, put in or insert a cane of lead and leave it for three days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into chambers. 
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this inflammation comes from the drying of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that dryness: if it is cured, as we have said of the cane of lead. 
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament 
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come below the buttocks are swellings and enlargements that come from near the buttocks or in the space between the two parts; if there is one fistula or more; and when this swelling is old, it works, and still brings forth white pus or thin mucus, and sometimes these fistulas disappear; and they are known by those who have them through discharge or flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps by a sudden jump. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder and halfway up the penis; and they reach the juncture of the thigh and up to the knee. 
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the fistula draining at the base, and not draining; and it is that you place your index finger or thumb on the base, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has tortuosity, if you insert a tent of fine flax, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there comes no discharge, neither flatulence nor worm, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hurry in healing. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends as far as the bladder or as far as the urethra, if the urine escapes and cannot be sealed by medicine. 
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced as far as the joint of the thigh, then the tent comes to the place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain surrounds it, then it must be allowed to ripen by itself, and neither medicine nor application by ointment will help; and in these fistulas that persist there is nothing but labor and vanity of foolish opinions that interfere. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those that are not crushed and not old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced; the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, and bend their thighs towards their belly; then put in a tent of thread or lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the base, you should put your index finger there and then feel if the tendon has been pierced; whether it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or flesh, then know that it is severed; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One always says that one can heal some well, but this rarely happens; and the help one does is to heat a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula as it has been previously said; and push the whole heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches the bottom. Do this two or three times, so that you know those faulty hairs are burned, which resemble a bird's feather. Then treat with softened bandages in butter, while these hairs are burning, then treat with ointment spreading char and soldering. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is well. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot otherwise be healed; and if the tent is inserted, and does not pierce through to the bone which is its foundation, and there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew between your finger and the tent; then cut the skin at the beginning of the fistule, and push it forward beyond the tent, and then apply the cautery until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and fall away; then cleanse those faulty hairs that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none remaining. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood comes, and runs between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine. 
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauteries assemble two good things: that is to say, the burning of these added flesh parts, and the extinguishing of blood and drying of moisture; then the treatment of softened wounds with butter or crushed cabbage, as long as the wound gapes wide, and it is burned into the wound gap; then treat the eye ailment with ointments infused in strong charcoals.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return. 
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes right to the bottom of the foundation, and is far from the body, put your finger or a probe into it and inquire. 
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between II is the cloth or the syfac or chars, where it is near to pierce, if there are no means except by faith and hope, through the administration of one of III ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put tents and cure as the first; and do not go too far in depth, so that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and the egestions come through there unwillingly; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it once it is cut near the foundation, either by tent or by another pointed instrument; then cleanse that faulty char that is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula on the part behind the foundation: so it would be a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And never are fistulas made in this manner; and it is when you place the tent into the fistula, and it is at the side or near the foundation of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:  
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bend the thread into two, and push the tent along the whole thread into the fistula as far as the head. 
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is passing into the margin of the foundation inside, then draw the thread from that hole, so that you moisten your finger or foundation; and pull the end of the thread, and join the two pieces together, and draw one against the other, and leave it for one or two days; and restrain it several times, until the threads catch those teeth which are between them, and they interlock; then cure the wound until it is closed and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, as long as it is not too constricted. 
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to make a bandage so tight, then cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spathe which has a spine and from which one makes a fistula is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, for this reason one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here. 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids 
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two manners: or they are within the fundament, just like a grain of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they are outside the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture, and still often have a drop of sharp citrine or a drop of blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them within the fundament is that you order the patient to abstain so as to go in chambers, until his fundament lets out, so that the threads appear. If you hurry, and it cannot be held with forceps, or you hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots; and if the forceps cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them with a rag, or with cotton, or with a piece of chamois leather; and pull them out with your hands, then cut them off, and powder them with some hot powders which are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed; and if the fundament cannot let out, give the patient a harsh and sharp clyster to wash out what is in the fundament, so that it can come out openly; when the patient has relieved himself, and the threads are loosened from the fundament, the cure is easy; and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with forceps, and cut them off, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you administer the suture according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then pull the thread up above and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be twice as wide; remove the formed thread, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave one to correct the excess blood; then put on the foundation a softened cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; then leave it until they heal, and when they are healed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are cured.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of the veins or foundation 
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of veins in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use. 
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that you place the point of a scalpel or your fingernail on top of the bark, so that it does not become moist; then treat it until it is healed as it should be; and if it cannot heal, start the shaving again more strongly than before, until it heals a lot and is scraped; then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	where it trembles 
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formication is a small false appearance against the body, and it goes very far; and sometimes one finds cold, and one feels it also like death's tremor, and it comes throughout the whole body, more in the hands than anywhere else. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and put that cane on the fremit until the circles turn purple around the entire fremit; then turn your hand with all the cane so that you wrap it completely around the fremit, and put it in perfectly, and pull out the fremit by its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this like a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be slender below and wide above: 
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, but hold it to the pain, and press.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the enema 
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one gives an enema of silver or artichoke, or melted lead or mallets; and sometimes one uses these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore those who are administered treatment for children and those who are weak and painful, are small. 
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, both small and large, is wide above, where the belly is bound according to this manner. 
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a separation where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and it has on one of the sides two holes, and on the other one; and let the belly where one puts medicines be from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small holes, and let there be between each hole one finger’s space, then put in these holes one strong thread of raw silk twisted in X or some such manner around, and assemble the belly as it were a goat; and when the medicine is within, if you tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then irrigate; and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently; then let the assistant hold the patient's two legs together until he is completely still, then extract the clyster, and have the patient lift his legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is of greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply a clysma for a disease of abdominal flux, and the medicine hastens to pass, then resume it until he is healed. 
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of a subtle enema on which the skin is extracted: 
des plaies	of wounds 
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division of the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures by hand and by medicine according to accomplishment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made with, and according to the place or the wounds are made, and by what they are made. 
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are made by the striking of a stone, and by the edge of a sword and knife, or lance or spear or arrows, or similar things; which are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck, or head, or breast, or belly, or liver, and similar parts.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you are careful whether it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: then make it heal quickly from the cephalic itself if only a little blood comes from the wound, and let it heal on the opposite side of the injured part; and forbid the patient to eat wine and heavy meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not heal, let his flesh be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a bit later here; and if he has moved it, put on some ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stitches, then sew them together as I will say for wounds of the belly, with sutures. 
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and can be held by only a point, then stitch it; then treat the wound with medicine and replace hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as haunches and cooked wheat, also pulse, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten flesh, and it does not reach the bone, cut off all the rot, and cast it out, then cure it; and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, cauterize the artery; and if you find it displaced, tie it with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light; and it is that you put in this powder which heals as soon as the fire has moved it. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is this: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and grind the powder subtly, and apply it to the wound, and let it form until it burns well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never is it done with chalk alone, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has cauterized the wound. 
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has burned the wound, immediately put nothing on it; but apply some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it boils; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with delicate pincers; and I will tell you about skull fractures later. 
de la plaie dou col	from the wound of the neck 
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut. 
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the cure and not apply anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be below, such as warm-washed chalk in mild water, and mixed with rose oil, and washed cucumber also in mild water, and other stones according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed. 
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is raised and full of pus, then pierce it lower; and if the artery is cut and blood flows, then untie it, ligature it, and cauterize it is necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is kept, by which the flesh goes, then sew the heart onto the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape; and then extract it carefully, and leave it for some days, then cure it with dry ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it; and if there are pieces of bone, then pull them out all together if you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave them until the wound rots, and is loosened and aligned to the exit; and if the wound is fresh, then powder over the powder that I have said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter. 
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound of lance or knife 
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if wind escapes from the wound while the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Heal it then with bandages and other treatments as long as it heals; and if it cannot heal, you know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is done as it should be. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife and it is simple, on the arm or back, then treat the one who is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, powder it; and if it has penetrated to the bone and has broken pieces, then wash the wound, and remove any foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester so that it will lighten the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	of tearing of the belly 
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, which prevents the introduction of others; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it is harder to put the intestines back in if they are not put back one by one hot; for the intestine swells quickly as soon as it feels cold so it goes back in better, and that is why a medium wound is preferred because you can reposition the intestine to its place as with the other two. And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners: the two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of the other wounds of the body; and two other proper sutures are common to the other wounds; and nevertheless they are more suitable with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines is outside, and it is easy to put back in place, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in lukewarm water squinant and cypress and spikenard, and remove the intestines as long as the swelling is removed; and never do this with restraining wine, for it is milder than that which only serves to reduce swelling. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestines with sharp or high and bad-tasting things that are cooked, for by these the entrance is aligned to little; and if it cannot enter, then make a cut in the wound with an instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure is smaller than the size, so that no one should cut without great necessity nor have it; and this is the instrument for cutting: if you slice inside at the curvature and defur not.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, then put it back in according to its natural form in its own place, if you have power, for this is worth much. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, it behoves that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your mind to it so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you should administer what I say in large and small wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, put what has been prepared for you, then hold in your hands the instrument that holds all the stitching together with its hand, and bring the edges together; and this is the common way of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound the space of two fingers, and put in a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the flesh which is under the skin inside, as far as you make it pierce that part, and bring the two edges of the flesh together four together; then draw it tight with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring the two edges of the wound together neatly, and then leave the space of two fingers, and put in another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need needles, as long as the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be middle-sized, between subtle and thick, because the subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they are middle-sized; and do not push the needles too far beyond the flesh and the skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture; then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths on top of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this way of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it allows for one needle or two. The second suture is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh together with one needle where there is a good strong thread of medium size; and when you have pierced these edges all four together, draw the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner in which we sew clothes; and leave space between each stitch the thickness of a half finger. This suture heals the man, and I sewed a wound on a man's belly or chest, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a handbreadth large, and it was the intestines that were well two handbreadths long, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.  
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I put the intestine back in place after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound was sutured up to XV days, and I treated it, and it healed. 
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And those who saw him thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I put only cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and push it from the outer part to the inner part until it goes through; when it has pierced the flesh straight through straight, then leave the head of the thread or twine or whatever you have pushed the needle with, and make it pierce through the other side from the inner part to the outer part; and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furriers do the furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the whole suture is complete. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is as follows: assemble the two sides together naturally, and apply one end of the sinew to the other end in this manner: insert a needle or the end of a thread nearby, and pierce through that place only, leaving the two ends of the sinew; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outer side to the inner side, along with the two ends of the sinew; then pierce both sides from the outer side to the inner side, in two other ends of the sinew which are on the other side; this is the simpler way of stitching and the most common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and no one contradicts it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in it; and one must put one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew belts; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more painful than others in the sides of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of the other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, then put back to air the intestine, and the cut; then put on top the powder of roasted charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound boils; and stitch the thread, and let the sifac, and the mirach be soldered; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on it, as soon as it begins to boil and swell, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in several positions when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause commonality to the principal members, it is fitting that you moisten linen slightly in tempered oil, or in rose oil, and place it around the embers, and under the armpits; and if he feels pain or decay in the bowels, which often happens, then give enemas of warm red wine, and similarly if the decay comes up to the intestines; and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the arrangement of its veins, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the arrow jumps from the wound, put it back in place as you would the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must bind the area that is black so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the binding, and suspend the two ends down from the part below the wound until it comes out to align the extraction when the arrowhead leaves, and the wound opens. 
de la routure dou boueil	Of the fracture of the eye socket 
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some men, for I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it was stitched up and became a fistula, and from it came the excretion and windiness; I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtlety until he was healed, and his intestines were joined. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and he did not have any pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: take flax with large heads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the flax has opened its mouth, put it on the two lips so that it tightens its mouth on them; and then cut off the head, and this will hold so that it cannot be untied, then put another flax afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is all closed up; and sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If these heads catch fire in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the head of this intestinal thread that is well stripped, then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread twisted tight, then pass the thread through the needle and sew the intestine and close it at the rupture; and this manner of sewing for trembling intestines is nothing more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is no remedy or healing except subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or where it may be 
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and returns inward. 
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the greenness, a hard and white nodulation, where there is no pain felt, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird; and sometimes in a clear bow, and sometimes thick; sometimes a spot, and sometimes enough; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the nine causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the edges, which does not allow flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or because the wound is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow to digest, and slow to heal, and swollen by nature; or because there are veins or bones; and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore, it is fitting that I make you aware of the treatment of fistula which is done by handwork. 
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the facial bone, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of difficult healing, and there is nothing else but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the place I have said, and you are confident of the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you want it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not bother you or the principal members as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, remove all the decay until it is entirely gone, then treat things that generate flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns back in the same way as before, know that you have not yet reached the end: uncover and scrape until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that corruption is too advanced, and you cannot proceed; there is nothing to do but leave it to nature; and if there is only a small bone corrupted, and you can grasp it with forceps, extract it with an appropriate instrument for this purpose; and if there are many bones, treat them all, leaving none behind; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut through the flesh, bone, and char, and free the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting decay on the wound and leave it until the flesh is rotted around the bones, then you will be able to remove the bones more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as one of the leg or thigh, let the corruption continue only until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a large part that has become corrupted, and it comes up to the marrow of the bone, you must sew and cover it all the way to the corruption, then cure it until it is joined; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man of about thirty years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the humors went to the leg, and it swelled into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the midwives, through their folly, worked so much on it that they opened the abscess, and corroded out many humors, and it became a fistula, and there came many pores that all discharged pus and moisture from the body; and many midwives treated him for about two years, and he had no wise man in the healing arts, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what ran out through the pores into a large container; and his body became red, and he had a yellow complexion. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent into one of these holes, and then I closed all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all sides of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone inside; I removed what appeared to me of the corrupted bone and thought there was no other corruption, except for that which I removed; and began to restore the wound with medicinal sodas for a long time, but could not solder it; and then I started again and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued into the bone, and removed it, and tried to solder the place; but I could not until I cut around a palm of bone, and applied the treatment to all its marrow, then I restored it with medicinal herbs; and it healed and soldered quickly, and it was no longer necessary to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For bloodletting often causes bleeding, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and was well-disposed and had no harm nor contradiction at all, neither coming nor going. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a linen cloth and bind it to the head of the bone which appears, and command someone to stretch it upward; and put another woolen bandage larger than the first bandage, and tie it above the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh beneath, and uncover the flesh on the place where you wish to solder, so that the solder does not burn the flesh; and put a burning ember or a plank underneath the bone to melt the corrupted flesh; and it should be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and treat it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, uncover all the flesh; then put the ember underneath, and then solder from one part to the other the corruption, and let the soldering be as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, solder the corrupted joint, and solder the bone where it contains on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than to solder; and if the corruption is at the point of the hand or the point of the foot, it is very serious, but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you; and know that there are many instruments for soldering these bones according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of them, their thickness and subtlety, their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each semblance of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to what it requires. 
dou feu	By fire 
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder can rot from within or from without; and when you have medicine to corrode that by the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by this means from death, or from the malice, which is greater, of the loss of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it appears as if it were burned by fire, and rots after the blackness, since the corruption goes from limb to limb, and takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten in cutting off, and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar creatures, if the corruption is at the head of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, bind it at the joint so that the gangrene does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, bind it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; and do the same when the gangrene comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, bind it after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, bind the whole foot; and if it rises to the leg, bind it at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs while you are working, cauterize the area immediately, or apply some astringent powders. Then return to your medicine until it is complete, and then bind the injured limb tightly with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his left foot: he developed a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corruption first appeared on the back of his left foot, spreading until it affected the entire foot. When the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cauterize his foot, and it was healed; but long afterward the corruption returned in the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied counter-irritant substances after cleansing his body, and was unable to stop the corruption; and he asked that I cauterize his hand, but I refused, for I had hoped to counteract the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the man's strength was weak. The man despaired entirely, and returned to his home, and hastened to cauterize his hand himself, and it was healed; and I have told this story only so that others may do likewise if they need to. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in fleshy place, and stays so long that it gathers a great deal of pus; and then it bursts and the pus flows out, and the sore remains open, like a vessel; and the skin on top is as thin as a delicate linen cloth, and does not extend to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such sickness is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin, if you cut it all around, even when it is thin, like linen; and does not spread because of its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have confidence that the flesh will burn and the corruption is not perfect, and the flesh is thick like leather, do the cure of an enema as follows: look to see if the breast is large, and the bowel that comes from it has a foul odor, then enema with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take alum, oil, and litharge, equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and make an enema into the breast and extract the pus; and leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, do not allow char to be generated there; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in such a way that the bowel runs down to the lowest place where it is. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast swells and is indigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal. 
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health at all, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and some who heal quickly; and if a hard lump remains in the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, apply drying medicines, moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as diachylon ointment, for there is a great deal of vitriol in it, and it is the last medicine. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger 
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A boil is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance arises in other places; and when it is envied, and no attention is paid to it, it comes a large abscess, running and carrying pus so much that it runs down to the root of the nail, and by chance runs all over; and corrosion comes up to the bone, until there comes foul pain, and the flesh of the place becomes wide, and its color red. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous flesh which has remained from the wound, then cauterize the wound afterwards. 
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauteries are of great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to grow in and bleed, then you should put a ray under the nail that pierces the flesh and push it up, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly, and put medicinal burning and corrosive substances on the remaining flesh to remove all of it. Then cure it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it and treat it hard, for as long as the corrupted bone is there, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone corrupt, cut it in one of our ways as mentioned before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is hard and swollen, and he feels great pain, you must first heal it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting across above it, and be careful that the cut does not go down to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the deafness of the hand 
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two fingers which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some us of the two. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born without any pain in the shoulder do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the shoulder sometimes move; the size of one who is fleshy should be light, in a certain way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is grief to cure: if you hold him tight. 
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must be delivered soon, it is necessary that you cut around the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a saw suitable for this, and then heal it until it is healed.  
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The weldings that come to two together come by birth, or by welding of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things. 
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is fitting that you bind this suture so that the bone may repair according to its natural shape; then place between two bandages or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not fuse; or you may place between two pieces of fine wood until the bone is fused as it should be. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling comes to any of his limbs with the palm, so apply that bandage as it should be. 
des vils	of old 
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large vessels wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, which come to many members of the body; and they are more common in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer to him a purge of coles, and then the juice of basil. 
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is in two ways: one is that you cauterize them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and treat it all thoroughly. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The setting is according to this manner: first raise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the fat becomes thin, then pull the leg from the patient above the thigh up to the part below the knee; then cut a vein in one place or two or three places, with a wide incision. Then draw and extract black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; and then bandage it, and order him to abstain from meat eating black garlic; and start again the evacuation and the purging when the veins are full, and harm the patient.  
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the arrow is according to this manner: Take the leg of the patient, if there are a lot of hairs, then put it in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire and then apply the place where the vein is long at the top of the knee or in the part below the ankle; then cut the skin with a knife, and flay the vein on every side until it appears when it is touched, and it is seen red and black, and when it enters into the skin it seems as white as a rope; then put the arrow underneath until it is raised from the skin, and then pull it up to the knife slightly, then apply it in another place three finger-breadths above; then flay the skin on the vein until it appears, then lift it with the arrow as you have done, and pull it to another knife as you have done first; then apply another incision or more if you need them, then lift it, and apply it to the toe, then draw and lift it up to the second incision; then extract it from incision to incision until it is entirely out, then apply it; and if you cannot draw and lift it, then put a strong double-threaded needle under it, tie it and draw it; and then put it under the arrow, and turn your hand on one side and the other until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, because if it cuts, you cannot draw or lift it and it will be harmful to the patient; and when you have drawn it all out, put wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wound together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly but do not sever it completely; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which one cuts the vein if it is curved, and does not cut, then it cuts the vein; and it is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the form: 
de la voinne civile	of the civilian vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is engendered in the legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes under the skin, as it comes within the body snakes and worms, engendering between the skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like a root of a plant. 
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder joint is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of linen from three and a half to eleven and a half fingers long, and tie a knot, and let the linen hang down the leg, and every time that there is pus coming out, wrap it around the linen again, and tie another knot; and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, as long as it is all coming out.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein only two times, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot or hand, and much pus comes out, and from which it springs; cure it then as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms which are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and the one who has it feels it well from limb to limb, as long as it runs under the skin where it goes, and jumps further; and it comes from the corruption of certain humors, as come worms and serpents and lampreys and roundworms or bellyache; and we doubt its malice, for when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters in, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cleansed and milked, one cannot remove it except when it goes: so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong cord tightly, then cut on top and milk it hard, and if the worm is fully embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cut on top and milk it hard; and it is necessary to treat the patient with cleansing of the body with dissolving medicines for bad rotten humors, and beware of food that causes rot. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain which comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This sickness is called "vacarir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arms to me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as a worm on her shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and went into her shoulder, and then a moment later ran throughout her body, until it reached her other arm; then she told me that it was now turning around her body, just as I saw it. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner. 
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had seen many who had indeed wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I had not wanted it myself, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and therefore appeared that constrained windiness; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind it above and below hastily, and then cauterize on top until the wind constraint in place is forced out; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then cure with those who expel winds, such as fetid pills, and serpent pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge. 
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are some which have large points, and small ones, and bearded ones, and soldered ones; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those in which there are pieces; and the one which falls into any member falls according to two manners: either into a principal member it falls, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the arrowhead is thus in any part of these limbs and the signs of death which I will tell you hereafter appear to you: then it behoves that you should abstain from extracting this arrow for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, treat it and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow hits and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is above the brain, is when there is scotoma and numbness and vertigo and redness in it, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is discharge without odor from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and there comes moisture from the wound white looking like a poultice, and it leaps also as if burned with fire; and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of a heart attack when it occurs is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the heart also moves like a pulse, and black blood comes forth, and there comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: know then without doubt that death follows. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never left the wound is that without pus it leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs heavily and desires cold air. 
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if an arrow lodges in the covering of the buttock, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great suffering and sighing; and it moves all the members of the shoulders. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow sticks in the stomach, by chance some undigested meat may come out of the wound. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow lodges in the gut or the stomach, and there is no passage through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow. 
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out burning, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal. 
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the shoulder blade and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions. 
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me so that you do the same. 
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell or slipped into the root of his nose; I tried it and drew it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any harm. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he pulled out an arrow with a game that had fallen into the fat of the eye below the skin below, and the arrow was feathered, and could only reach the point towards the fire, and it was a large arrow like a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; the player was healed, and no evil accident came to him. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with fletching: I shaved the beard, and I worked subtly until I removed it, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I removed an arrow from a man who had it lodged in his belly and thought he would die; and then after thirty days he did not change position at all; I cut upon the arrow and hooked it, and removed it, and he had no bad consequence. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man into whom an arrow has fallen or gone in, and the wound has healed over it; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor finds harm in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn shut; and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I drew out an arrow from the nose of the king, who was fallen into it halfway, and it was leaning a little to the right side; and the arrow was all buried. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very narrow. 
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I put it all to the test with great subtlety, and I did not feel it at all; and he felt numbness and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of an arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for four days, and sewed up the wound right away, and kept the patient like that for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his flesh; and he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and tested it, feeling the head of the arrow rise to its place; then I added more of that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and within four months the end healed well, and then I widened the wound so much that I could put in the forceps, moving it from one side to the other, and it would not come out; then I did not stop refining and devising instruments in various ways until one day I took it out with well-made forceps, according to its form which will be shown at the end of this chapter, so that I extracted it and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the master surgeon judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters compare themselves to a very small thing, and to what is present and lacking, they find nine works, and nine instruments, at the descent of foreign things which happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not leave the limbs where they are stuck except according to two methods: either through the place where they enter or through another part; and the one that is removed through the place where it enters is an arrow entered into their flesh, and is rarely removed now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the way out is clear; and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce around it with a fine awl, until the flesh around it is enlarged, and then extract it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: then do not draw it out, but leave it until it is equal after several days, for if the arrow comes as far as the sinus, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed in more than just the bone, and it does not reach as far as the sinew, and the patient remains for a few days without bad accidents, then draw it out with an engine. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck like this and cannot come out by force, then administer poultices around it, as I have told you; then heal the area until it is healthy. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that you cannot see it, if it has all of its fletching; and if you can feel it, draw it out with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen the wound so that it is large; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it holds, remove the flesh which is stuck to it on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it; but be careful not to break the arrow so that you would draw it more grievously. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh has rotted, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood is against you, apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and place whatever you can to draw out the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell upon him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes in from another side, or where it appears nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place so that one sees it or feels it apparently: cut then, as much as the pliers can grasp, and then extract it; if it jumps now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out. 
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out forcibly; and if there were an arrow there, push it in all the way through; and if it were bone, and you see that it must be pushed, administer the instrument with its point facing down, so that the point of the arrow enters into the groove of the instrument; and then push forcibly, and if the arrow is raised, push the instrument in with the point entering inwards to ease the extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow lodges in the flesh or chest or belly or bladder or side, and it is close to the surface, and you can grasp it, then grasp it; and be careful not to grasp the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary; and treat it until it heals. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs with which we treat arrows is like the beak of a bird, and see here its form: 
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the end of the arrow is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as this is the shape: 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tongs for pushing and for knowing if it is this: 
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body 
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one can be bled, of which there are XVI on the head; to wit: II batans which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the II arteries which are in the II temples apparent; and II veins which are in the II corners of the II eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein which is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein which is on the top of the head; and the II guindeges which are at the neck; and the II veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augeherich"; and II veins which are below the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which are commonly used for bloodletting are three in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side, and common people call it "the vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it "the vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and common people call it "the vein of the belly," and it is above the fossa, and it is the one we use for bloodletting, which appears clearly on the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvation vein is the one that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the pocket on the left side, and the second is a saphenous vein that is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The vein of the temples behind the ears helps against old catarrhs and migraine; and the quality of the bleeding, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the neck of the patient to a screw, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two strands hanging from the head: then press them with your finger, and wherever you feel the pulse below your finger, mark it; then take the lancet and push it under the vein until the bone; then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards and cut both the skin and the vein well in two directions, and let blood flow out as much as you see; then bind and bandage it until it heals. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for an old headache, and a chronic one, and a customary ophthalmia, and for the body of sharp tears as it were; and the quality of the bleeding is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and he puts his thumb under his collarbone, and then presses with his index finger; then lifts the heart up on the vein in high at your thumb index, and puts the lancet below, and lifts the vein upwards, and cuts it as you have done in the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your necessity; then loosen the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of them, and their cutting, and their extraction, at the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the bloodletting of the cephalic for diseases of the face that are old, and migraine, and redness. 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then untie the patient's neckband, and tie the vein tightly so that it is clean and never again opened with a wide blade. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not fitting that the flame be too strong; and cut across, for the bone is close by, and by chance break the flame when it is subtle. 
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with those things, and with tinnitus, and with redness, and with inflammation in the eye, and with illnesses of the face; and the quality of their bloodletting is such that the patient twists his neck with some kind of bandage, as before; then he bleeds, and let the bloodletting be either a deep cut, a long one, or a wide one.  
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, it may break; then make a dressing of blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well. 
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein of the nose is good for ague, and strong feverishness, and illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, even when it is old; and the quality of the blood is such that the patient constricts his neck, then strains his nose in your left hand, and takes a long, subtle flame, and puts it between the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well unless you do so, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not go too far into perfection, and let two bloods flow according to your need, then bind it one night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The vein of the two temples helps in the constriction of the bladder, and at the beginning of measles, and for many diseases, and for impetigo, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and for estiomenes; and the quality of the vein is such that the patient draws his neck under the one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then cut the vein along a wide space, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as needed; then redo the same in the other vein, then loosen the tie, and release all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	From the health of the liver 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The veins of the lips above help to glue in the mouth, and to corrupt gums, and fissures of the lips, and teeth rot and decay. 
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the vein is to have the patient sit in front of you, and pull their neck as I said; then turn back the lip, and look for the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that small black veins surround them: so take both, and if you don't know them, and you are in doubt, take the largest of each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the vein under the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The vein bloodletting under the tongue helps after the cephalic bloodletting, and it is for constriction of the throat, and eye diseases, and mouth diseases; and the quality of the bloodletter is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein: bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins through which we commonly heal are healed in two ways: either by pricking with a sharp flame or a very fine olive-wood instrument like cutting needles, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the burning mirror is much renowned and is wide as you see: 
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are full of thick blood visible, and which contain thick and muddy blood; and this is the form of olive oil. 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and it is for lancing subtle veins, where there is thin yellow blood. 
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly; and it is necessary for the healer to bleed it well, and to wash from the artery that is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it severs the artery and bleeding comes, then you must cauterize it as I have said; and the flame should not be pointed but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it and change another; or if you want any vein of it, or you put in its place the vein under the arm: it opens manifestly; and apply the cup to the flame as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the location of the vein, it is necessary that you remove the arm, so that you touch the location until you know the pulse; then mark the location with a bandage and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a lancet cauterized in flame; and be careful not to wound the artery when you see the inflamed place because it is the artery: avoid it then.  
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protrude at the top as urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: hurry then and place your finger on length, and then remove your finger if the blood stops; many times this happens; bind the arm then and leave it like that and do not move it for the patient; be without fear and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stemmed, and it flows to you, and the medicine is not present, then bind the artery if it appears, for the head of the vessel will retract; and stem the blood. 
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a bark of fig and cut it, and take one half and tie it well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, cure it as we have said with powders that stop blood; and the stopping of the bleeding is not bad in several positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the bandage on the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle aids so that it draws blood from above the head and below the body, for which reason it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic as we have said; and it behooves the healer to beware of the nerve that is beneath, and if he points too far and finds the nerve, it will swell and the wound will fester, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve appears much more often, and if it does not appear in some men for its subtlety, then you must use an instrument to loosen the nerve. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision long. 
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic is so helpful that it draws blood from the head and helps them; and one must bleed by pricking at the olive flame or the myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery beneath it.  
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is best to seek the lightest place, and do not worry if it fails the first time, and you start again; and by chance the limbs swell in some men when it fails the first time, but it does not matter. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thought. 
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is not administered except to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins which are: cephalic, basilic, and fasting; and it should be done at the beginning of spring for young people, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first day or the third, after two hours or three of the day. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The saigne which is administered to the sick has no determined hour, but only when need is of day or night, in all hours and all times; and it does not behoove to bleed children until XIV years, nor a woman carrying a fetus beyond the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Those who have passed sixty years should not be bled. 
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be blooded, in whatever way it may be, it is fitting that he should cleanse his bowels with a light clyster, if he has retained much phlegm, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines harmful superfluities damaging the principal members; and no one who is too full of meat, or drunk, to the point of being forced, or dropsied, should be blooded; and one should not blood after a colic passion, vomiting, flux of the bowels, and multiplication of intercourse with a woman, and labor, watching, and fasting, and those whom all virtue has left, or by some thing from the weapon or body; then subtly the humors, if he is fat, by food and drink and medicines, if you have the power to procure them; then enter into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein of the left arm around the third hour, as we have said; and keep yourself on that day from work, and exertion, and luxury, and similar things; and be calm and joyful, and let the bleeder be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then loosen the ligature moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot hold the blood; and then rub the place with his hands until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the bleeder’s thumb with a drop of old oil, then put his left hand finger on that vein beneath the place one fingerbreadth from where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not move and fail when struck.  
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as cords in the body, and if some are full of windiness, so that when you apply fire, it withdraws from the fire and cannot open the vein, then one is like this; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon be warned in these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, start again a little lower than that place or higher quickly, if the veins are not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the arm is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days, and do not bandage the arm: for fear it may develop abscesses; nor bathe in it, then begin the lancing again if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the sinew subtly, and you doubt that it will not issue as much blood as you see, thrust into that wound itself all the flame directly; and perform a hastening puncture so that the arm is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not start the bleeding again, and put a poultice of oil on it, for it relieves the body of blood, and the oil mixes with the poultice in this place; and thus administer the oil poultice in every vein that you bleed, to stop the flow of blood; and the same does triacle and wormwood, when it is put on the place; if too subtle the poultice, it separates when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess should develop, which often happens even when the vein opening is small except for the time when blood is being drawn, then hurry and put on the area a sponge moistened with hot water and vinegar, and leave it there for an hour; and you must do this after the blood has been drawn from the vein. And if it stays in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, do not harm it; and if you see, put on some aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, monsterwort, or something similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there arises an abscess and swelling in the vein of the arm; put your hand on it, then if you find the place soft under pressure from the hand, that swelling is bad. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not put anything on any of what we have said, for fear in cutting it will hit an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the place and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.  
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood. 
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down. 
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for one who is strong and robust, and needs bloodletting, that a wider incision be made, and the lancet be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled frequently in small amounts, and he must be bled by cutting across, not by piercing; and this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive bleeding and damage to nerves, and is worth more than a long or wide incision. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body lacks nourishment at the time of healing, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is hot, draw blood three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, give him before the healing softened bread in thickened syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a fragrant syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the flow of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of veins. 
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to strengthen his arm, and bleed again, it is fitting, when he is weakened by a large bloodletting, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength continually. 
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to cauterize their arm after the first incision, and they have strong flesh, then they should cauterize seven hours after the first incision, or after the ninth hour. 
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to heal from another part, it must heal on the second or third day. 
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and brings fever; so it behoves to draw forth a great quantity, and enlarge the opening so that it flows freely like a stream; then after you have attended to all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come in place of healing, which often happens when the healer is negligent; and it behoves not when you see the arm untied, and make the blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press hard upon it; nor if it is crooked, that he stretches out the arm hastily, for this would be bad; but let him keep it as long as it heals the second time; or put a burning coal at its point, so that the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein flows freely, and put upon it a piece of silk made sharp, and press lightly. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed. 
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, if the vein in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm. 
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein beneath the arm is cut in place of the head vein because it is composed. 
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, until the pulse is red; then it is tied moderately so that the vein appears well, then the bloodletting is done now across, not broad nor long; and the opening should be wide, and the bloodletting done very close to the joint of the hand, and if no blood can come out, the patient puts their hand back into hot water, and lets the blood run into the water until they have enough; and if it is summer, do not plunge the hand back into hot water, for one puts it in more in winter than in summer; and the bloodletting of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sinew of the salvation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and plunge it into hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if you see it; and if the sinew is across, and if you cut it in every part, it does not grieve anything; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all bare of flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is needed, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do the same for every wound. 
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sinew of the hand in the left is worth as much for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right. 
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The vein of the sophene is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and legs old, and similar diseases. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his remedy is such that the patient puts his bare foot in hot water, and rubs it on the vein until it bursts, and ties it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and runs up the foot with many veins; so heal either a larger vein, or one at the ankle, which is better. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cauterize it on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are underneath, and cauterize it through as in cutting; and let the flame be numb. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back into the water, and let the vein drain well. 
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the sinews fail the first time, begin again a second time above a bit, for the flesh is salty; do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and so do to the sinew of the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The sinew of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pain extends to the hip, when it is due to hot blood. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his vein is such that the patient must enter or bathe, and twist four times above the ankle, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, pull the vein in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is worth more to draw it than to cut it, for the blood is beneath, and it is very full of hands. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, so healthy any vein of his that opens or on the back of the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves; and make as much flow of blood as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on top and remove it; she is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	from cupping glasses 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horns, or gourds, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding. 
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventosation which is done without iron is according to two manners: either it is with all fire, or without fire; and ventosation which is made by striking and by extraction of blood is made in fourteen places on the body, of which one is all at the top of the head; and the others are below the neck; and two others on the sides of the neck; and the cupping glass below the chin; and the cupping glass on the two shoulders; and the cupping glass on the buttocks; and the cupping glasses below the two arms; and the cupping glasses on the two legs; and the cupping glasses on the two ankles; and the ventosation does not draw blood, except for small veins which are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken one at all, as one does when drawing blood from a vein; and it is not right that it be administered, neither with all fire nor without fire, in any illness which comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity of illnesses requires cupping, or for customs, if we apply it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and midday and every time; for there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; and there are some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in them; and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood; and there are some who faint, and see by night blood and sadness and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is less than a month old, we order him to be cupped after three hours of the day. 
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sinew of the thigh helps the headache... which comes from them, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it is not fitting that he who is of cold complexion use it, or who has diarrhea, for this does them much harm; and for this reason it is not fitting that the elderly use it, nor those who have head colds. 
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often become oblivious, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a bit lower due to the fear of oblivion. 
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Ventosation applied to the neck is in place of the sanie vein and the basilic vein, and for this it is worth for the constriction of the bladder, and for the fissure of the canal of the rectum, and for all other things; and one must not press too hard, because if it holds too firmly, it will cause obstruction or stomachache and heart problems. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Cupping at the second ribs of the neck is good for headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth; it is placed on the line of the basilica vein; and you must instruct the patient to press his hand down on it so that he does not cut an artery and blood does not flow. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Cupping below the chin is good for mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is also in the place of the sores of the two lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and swelling. 
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations of the thighs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient that he should not make too deep a drawing, because the flesh is naked of fat, and beneath lie nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass which is on the croup is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it is fitting that the cupping glass be large and be of iron so that it has need to draw well; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and it makes large wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the cupping glasses on the legs bleed freely, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the loins, and bladder, and soften tumors; and they are placed in the location of the two thighs, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring paleness in many conditions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping glass is that you put it first empty and suck slightly and put it hastily and move it evenly and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen and appear the redness of blood; then remove and put back the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the bodies because there are some who have thick flesh and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike once only and make wide wounds and a deep one and suck slightly.  
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it is fitting to cut it twice: the first time to make subtle the way of the thick blood. 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is fitting to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out blood little by little, we only strike once. 
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we begin often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the ends should be such that the heart is pierced frequently; and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have large pores, that you moisten the places where the cupping glasses will be applied with oil that is stimulant and dissolving: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar oils. 
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if he whom one treats has tender flesh and large pores, it is not fitting to put any oil on, but rather one must wash after the cupping with rose water, or cold water, or nightshade water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should get up with ash, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things. 
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities should rise from old wine, or vinegar, or decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping, and he should wash himself both when he is about to be cupped and after he has been cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard against those who are recovering from anger, and if the wound is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce in summer, and similar things; and eat little, and goat meat, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat little, and eat few and small birds and pigeons; and on the day they will vent themselves, they should drink more than eat; and it is fitting to give some men triacle or musk before or after venting, to strengthen the principal limbs; and let the sans be subtle but it does not fit for those who are hot to drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without wounding are those that are applied on the liver, and on the bladder, and gout, and on the stomach and the arm and the thighs and the hip, for these limbs do not suffer to be wounded at all, and it is only done for the purpose of drawing blood from one member to another, just as we put them on the breasts when a woman does not bleed; for removing the viscosity that is in the member, just as we apply cupping glasses on the stomach and on the arm to reduce the member; and removes pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or detaches the stone from its place; and so it does when it is applied on the liver and on the bladder when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water, just as in diseases of pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus: 
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should be two fingerbreadths wide and half a palm long, and it should have a small hole in the middle, like for sticking a needle through, and made of horn, sharpened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and it should have a crossbar in the middle, made of horn or iron, to put a candle holder on, and they should be large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them; for children's cupping glasses are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat ones. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must put this suction cup onto the limb: take a candle of wax or linen thread and put it in the suction cup through the stem which is in the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and your two hands must be on the opening that we have said, so that when you want to see if it goes vapor, and take off the suction cup; and take the linen thread as before, and start again often, if you need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass which is administered in sickness of pleurisy, to all acute [conditions], it has neither stem nor hole, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and it is placed upon the limb only; and this is its form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suppositories are only administered in limbs where one cannot apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places devoid of flesh, such as the breast or nose, and other similar places; and the quality of the user is that when you find suppositories that are sharp, clean, sweet-smelling without a foul odor, then take them; and put them for a night in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then bleed from the vein and apply a cupping glass, then rub the limb so much that it becomes red, and place the suppositories on top of it; and when they are full and shrink, if this is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, then apply it, for this is worth much afterward. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the place of its ailment, and then with a sharp edge, very well, and then apply pressure; and if the veins are too close to the body after the operation, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top, until the vein is numbed; and if the veins are multiplied, put ground vitriol or alum, and similar things, on top until it is numbed. Or you put half of peeled beans on the place, and leave them until they burn at the place, this will stop it now; and if you need more, take other beans. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the bristles do not want to take hold, rub the place with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the bristle comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn; and when you see that they fall off, sprinkle powder on a piece of aloe and silk ground up, or ashes, and they will come off now. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures 
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations. 
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the follies which are described in this chapter have never been seen in any of the ancient books, nor read by letter; and for this reason the science is strange in our land, for I never found any good one; and I know nothing except through the science of the ancient books, where I studied so much that I learned it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have shortened it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments which are administered, as I have done in these two previous chapters. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore it is necessary that we say or prologue of this book the summaries of speech and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell upon the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others. 
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing else hinders him, such as weakness of the body, or infancy, or old age; or if his temperament is very bad, or too cold; and forbid cold foods, that is to say, cold drinks, and meat of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading matter in the limb; if the patient returns to his first regimen which he used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that promote thick nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and peas, and cow's stomach, eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. 
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at half-brokenness it is recovered more quickly than the fracture. 
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be properly set or soldered according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but do not worry, set the broken bone with a large splint which grasps and joins the limb together, as firmly as it was before; and do not remove it from its work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish it with large meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are various in many ways. 
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. 
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others that are sharp, as the point of a pen for writing. 
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture at any small crack. 
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each condition has its own engine and its own instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place; and the fracture of a bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted and clearly visible upon touch, and it gives way under pressure from the hand; and when there is neither twisting nor pain on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not behoove you to move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that come later, and then extract it now subtly. 
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that for a fracture that goes into the limb, and the two parts are separated, it is now necessary to set them straight equally, just as abscesses come if they are hot; and if hot abscesses come, leave it for a few days until the abscess is calmed; then set it straight, so that you can move it lightly and wisely.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it is the hand or foot, or if it is a small limb, or two cords, or one cord and in the hand; and set the limb according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken limb are loosened, reset by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not set correctly; if it sets beautifully, do not constrain it too much, nor press as those who bring forth by their work a hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is set, chastise the patient well so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other manner; and guard well that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, and it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain; and see to it that it is set straight, so that crookedness does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form. 
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar ones; so it is fitting to wrap them in soft and subtle linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg; so it is fitting to wrap them with a wide and strong bandage, for wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no strain; then tie around some light wadding, three turns or four according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little at all of the bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, so that the fracture then moves away a little; and soften the bandage a little, as much as you take a large part of the healthy place, then take up the other bandage, and turn around again on top of the broken place; then return to the lower part of the fracture, and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first line above; then put between the bandages wadding of linen or cloths, so that they are all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something soothing and hot to the abscess, which removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days; then strain with your splints, and they should be half the width of a cane, cut wisely, or made from wood used for making wedges, or palm leaves, and they should be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others; and be as long as is suitable for the limb in size or largeness; then remove it on the splints as you did at first, then tie a thread above it, just as in the first time on the fracture; tighter underneath, looser above; and it is necessary that the threads are medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the works of fools who make their bandages of twisted linen thread, and this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not right that there be less than two finger-widths of space between each splint. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is bruised by the head of the bones after cauterizing them in their health, put under them pads of linen, or wool fleece, so that they do not bleed. 
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say the cure hereafter. 
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to set all broken limbs on the first day. 
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not right to put strong splints before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your surety of a hot abscess appearing; and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour which sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of plaster restoring fractures in many positions, and likewise for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of poultice restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barleycorns and ladani and enula and asefetida and gum arabic and mugwort, each ten grains; myrrh and aloes, each five grains; alkanet nine grains; and make a powder, and mix them with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is worth more than many men. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster for twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, each X grains; myrrh and aloes, each IX grains; acacia VI grains; Armenian bole X grains, and grind well, and mix with vinegar or the white of an egg, and administer it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothes the pain arising, and it uses the size of the bone, and the breakage: take new wool, and moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore anything, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removes pains. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and leaves of common poppy, and grind together, and make plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of plaster to restore a broken bone and to soften the remnant of an abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marsh mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix it with coriander water moist, or with water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of plastering, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of a limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of marsh mallow, and seed of flax, bugloss, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and confect with water of salt, or soft water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard. 
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one must place upon the broken limb, for restoration, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, and similar things, as we have said. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make a plaster that is good for wounds and pain: take mugwort and horsehair cut short, or bird feathers, and mallow, and bind them equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it. 
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then he loosens it a little after, and takes care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; if not, he does not loosen it for several days. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess boils and reddens and hurts and swells, it is better to remove all the pus, and then you need plaster and bandages, and if it starts again as you did at first equally. 
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not untie it until after III days or IIII or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what one sees, so that the fracture heals, and the adjustment of the flesh approaches; then restrain it more than at first, and thicken its meat, as I have said before; and if you see the place dry more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; apply therefore a poultice of lukewarm water, every time you untie it, and do this every three days, and leave a poultice on the wound for an hour; by this work you will therefore cut off the nourishment to the limb, and quickly amend what foolish surgeons do who leave the limb crooked: this is bad, and these are dangerous operations, and I see nothing else but leaving it and working it straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the diverse ways of fracture 
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the bone until the syfac which is below the bone, as a hatchet or axe does; and for this reason this manner of fracture is called “haichure”. 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword strikes the bone above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small. 
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or a crack or chips of stone, or chairs on stone, or other similar things. 
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a fracture that extends close to the membrane that is under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is either large or small. 
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound is healed to the bone as thin as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture “capillary”; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the piece of bone enter inwards, and the edges are close together like the cauldronsmiths when they strike on the cauldrons; if the stone enters inside. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have soft or wet bones, such as the skull of a child; and it occurs in all these ways of breaking where small pieces are separated, such as splinters; and I will speak about them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction upon them, and the inquisition at attempts, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them. 
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	Similar hair is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs carefully upon it, if it appears black broken. 
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be mindful of the patient's conditions, and if you see any bad sign, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, tension, fainting, fever, and the eyes coming out forcefully and reddening, and other similar things in various states, it cannot heal without doubt. 
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeless situation, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment. 
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the disease first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the time that you can. 
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur. 
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches as far as the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the divided part thus: and that you take hold of the head of the patient firmly, and expose it on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more often than you can, and if discharge of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess arises, help him with what is necessary, and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess that has arisen is appeased, and are sure of the discharge of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method if you cut a narrow incision in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another incision larger than the first. 
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of different sized incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of hardened iron; and work lightly so that you do not crush the head. 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with trephines, without making sure that they do not penetrate beyond the bone on which they are used; and it must have on its point a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, so that each one comes in its place according to the shape of the bone, so that you have trephines for all of them; and this is the form of the three ways of trephines: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put the awl on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the awl elsewhere a bit after, and do this all around, then cut with the incision tool the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, it is fitting that you leave the instrument which has remained on the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is fitting that it be thinner and more subtle than the other incisor; and if there remains anything of small bones or scales, remove them lightly with the other instruments; then treat the wound with tents and dressings as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is as the Galliens say, which is safer; and praise it very highly, and this is their word. 
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to be moving; so that when you have uncovered that part, you put below the head of this lens-shaped instrument: 
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and leave the part sharp on two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly chop around the bone, and be very careful of the cloth beneath; if it is close to the bone, gently lift the bone, for one can lift it well without harm, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not extend to the skin, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and remove the scales with a fine razor which you should have in various sizes, so as to administer the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture. 
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If kings before great razors, and afterward of more subtle ones, and do not cease to do so until it is well. 
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other types of hair-cutting and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to its direction; and this is a matter not answered by him who has put his study into this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the fistula is uncovered, it behoves you to take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound; then take another cloth doubled into two or three, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not burden the fistula, then administer another bandage over it, and do not bind it too tightly only as much as to hold the wound; and leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscesses have quieted, then unbind it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it upon the wound, and administer now worldly medicines without biting; and see that the wound is now clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow any pus to collect, for when pus collects upon the cloth over the brain, it will corrupt and fester, and will cause the patient great harm; for when one puts something biting upon the fistula, it irritates it above. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt. 
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackening does not come except for the medicine that has been put on it, which has a particular virtue, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue one cloth, and you put it on the syphilis; then you cure it in the manner that is appropriate, until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts of the nose above are sometimes broken, or one by itself, for they are bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it heals. 
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your little finger or a small hole in the bone, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and into the pouch by force, until the bone returns according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the knee and the bone cannot return to its place, then you must put it even with the head of a nail as thick as a thumb. 
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, do it again in the same way and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses that have formed are appeased, then apply at the head of the wound two strips of linen cloths.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you put it on one side and the other side is broken; and if the tents are so large that they fill the openings of the nose. 
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer should moisten the bandages with butter, and change them every day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in a preparation of egg yolk and mill powder; then leave the splint on as long as the bone is strong and the cartilage hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes put goose feathers in place of bandages, and if it is wrapped with a linen cloth, and the fracture is held together, and the patient blows upon it; do what you see. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess bursts while you are working on it, put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a drop of diascordium. 
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come, then apply a plaster made with rue flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg yolk; then put it on light cloths and do not tie it with a bandage; and if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with instruments suitable for this, and sew the incision, and treat it with things that help heal flesh and solder, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound in the bone, then treat it with splints and put canes of lead until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone 
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is completely dislocated below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only below, and is not broken in two, but merely pushed inward, so the practitioner can easily recognize it. 
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, put your index finger of the right hand, and gently push the fracture inside, and with the other hand, set it straight. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then you must administer extension in two portions, so that it is equal. 
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or fracture, bind them with thread of gold or silver or silk; then apply cerate to the broken mandible and put a double cloth on it; and put on the cloth a large well-made star, or a piece of leather equal in length and width according to the mandible, and tie it up as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.  
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, if it loosens on the third day, and then puts back what has changed; and put a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with plenty of egg or flour of sesame, after you have removed the scab; and put light linen over the plaster, and if the plasters dry out and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a boil comes, do as we have said many times. 
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, see if any piece of bone is removed; if it is very subtle, remove it with suitable instruments for this. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame according to your need. 
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there are none left, if the wound is wide, apply on it plasters suitable for that purpose, to generate flesh, until it is healed. 
de la forcele	from the strong hand
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strong hand breaks many times forward, toward the shoulder, and the fracture is according to III manners: or it is broken and detached in two, and there are fragments, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is this: when the break is without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the bone is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then set the break evenly according to your judgement, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor protrusion. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, put a round sphere of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it thick according to your need; stretch and lift the force, and pull the sphere with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus out backwards, because it comes in straight, then it is necessary for the patient to lie often on his back, and put under the shoulder a half pillow, and push the ministers' shoulder down, until the bone of the humerus is raised. 
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then set the fracture according to your will, and if you find it broken, it is necessary that you cleave upon it; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any pressure, take a hold of one of the incisors that you have; but place underneath the forceceps this instrument, to guard the syfac: 
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not sharpened, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two heads, as you see, and one is broad, and the other narrow, as is the break in the wound that you have made when you have treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cauterize the wound, and if the break is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, dress the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and alum and wine, and put it on. 
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incision, is that you put on the bone the plaster of powder from the mill and yolk of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a splint under the armpit if you need it; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, and then put two cloths on top of the bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage up the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit; and loosen it from each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly, and you see clearly that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then leave it alone for a day, and when the bandages loosen, then tighten them; and let the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up high; this will lighten the fracture by lifting the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents happen, for twenty days; then start the plaster again if you see he needs it, and remove it and leave him like that until he is restored; and it is restored at most in twenty-eight days, and less in some men. 
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the fracture of the shoulder 
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates, and it is not possible to put it back in place except by touch; if you arrange it according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in all the ways that you can; then put powder from a mill with plenty of egg white on it, and light bandages, and put a double cloth over it.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not below the heart, then push it up, and splint it, and do what we have said about breaking the forcele to soothe the abscess with heat. 
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot 
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in two, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it descends below, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and all at once, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the hair on the broken bone, and everyone feels it well. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back, and they put a cushion between the shoulders, then they press the shoulders, and they assemble the ribs of the two sides with their hands, and subtly they make it equal in all the ways that they can, so much that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then they put on plasters and bandages above the fine plaster of salt, or other light herbs, and they wrap it in a cloth, and they tie it above the broken bone so that it does not move; and they turn the bandage roundly to the back, and they loosen it gradually, and they watch each hour the ligature, and if it loosens, they loosen it; and if it is necessary to untie it because of corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten yourself, and untie it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come there in ways of cures; then they reapply the plaster, and they loosen it as much as it is healed. 
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs 
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs only comes from behind, after the back and especially in the upper part, and they do not break except because they are slippery; and one can feel it well by inquiry with two fingers. 
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restoration is such that you put the fracture equal, as it should be. 
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a plaster, and remove it with a spatula, if you need to. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inward, then the patient feels great pain and pressure, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining; and the flesh has points, and all together vomits a great quantity of blood, and it is dangerous, and the ancients have described it in great detail. 
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflate the belly, to drive out the fracture. 
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, so that warm abscesses do not come, if they have not already come. 
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, so be it healthy. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say none of us puts cupping glasses on the spot, to suck out pus, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass may draw superfluities to the spot due to the weakness of disposition. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the area with linen soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the pressure around it, then it is cured by a pleural cure, meat, and medicine. 
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone pointing through the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the vessels; and then one should trench the bone, and draw it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put it on cloths moistened in rose oil and apply it to the area; and cure it as is needed for the abscess, and let it lie often on its side or wherever it should be until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the neck 
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a bone breaks at the neck, and it also happens that it rains; and so too in the spine of the back. 
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, if you are careful and see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are removed and nothing else, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given to him. 
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is healthy or not, see if his feet are softened, and if the accidents are in his hands, and on the back there is windiness and expulsion without will; and when he is turned onto his stomach, there is expulsion without will. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if you do not labor in its treatment. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this incident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter. 
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is calmed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain, as long as he is healed. 
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover it on the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment made with charred material, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your left hand under it, and make it equal to the other hand with your power, then put plaster and a splint on it, if you need them; then remove it, and if there are any broken bones, do the same thing, and remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the bone of the hip 
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It sometimes happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there would only be a slight reduction in height at the head; and making it long, and sloping to the side, and causing the patient pain in the area, and numbness, and swelling where it is broken. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, as long as you are above the fracture; and know which is the fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then set that fracture equally, as long as it is in its natural shape. 
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inwards, have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears to you. 
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place, apply a plaster, then place a splint of wood or horn on top, and hold the fracture still so that it does not move; and bind the area below the ribs, as long as the joint is aligned. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if boils come, do not touch them until the boils are appeased, and put on what we have said before; then return to restoration, and extract it as it is necessary, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner. 
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder 
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, so you must restore it according to one of two ways: one of which is that you take a splint of medium thickness, according to this form: 
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two bones with two bandages and lift them up, and make the patient sit on a seat; then have someone put their broken arm on a stick until it reaches the armpit, and they should bend the stick, and then lean it against something heavy where the minister extends it downwards; then the doctor places the fracture equal to his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should. 
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one lays the patient on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all the ligament, and each stretches in his part. 
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their respective parts. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is fitting that you put one bandage below the armpit and the other towards the elbow, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the elbow, it is fitting to put a bandage lightly, without effort, as long as the fracture is equal on the place and on the elbow; then set the fracture equally as it should be, and remove it, if no abscess comes. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess should come, do not drain it until seven days have passed, and place upon it linen moistened in water and rose oil, until the abscess has subsided; then drain it, and the manner of draining it is as follows: you put a plaster on the rupture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and place a cloth, and drain above the shoulder joint, and above the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone has not moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints and place on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two finger widths of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side; then strain upon the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter upon the fracture, harder and less in moving it away. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the bones, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the tie every three days, so that itching does not swell or come to the place, where the nourishments cannot come to the member because it is too tight. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the flesh, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents occur, do not loosen the bandage for three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; and place a cushion full of wool evenly under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move or become softened by the bandages. If it straightens by the power of medicine, give him the meat we have mentioned before in part, so the meat is thin at first; and when he begins to recover, make it larger. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be held together for forty days altogether; and then one must untie them and administer baths and ointments to straighten the place. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and tight, it will remain untied for I day or II months. 
de la brisure du bras	Of the breaking of the arm 
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fosciles", one of which is small, and this is the one that enters the pouch; and the other is large, and this is the one that is below, towards the little finger; by chance the large foscile breaks alone, or the small one, and by chance both together. 
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken altogether. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is a small bone that is broken alone, then it must be gently stretched, and set equal. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the larger muscle, it is necessary to restrain it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher up so that the patient does not suffer any hardship; then extend the minister's arm below his hand, or at the bandage, and another minister above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the sights equal, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place; and if there is any detached that grasps the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision on the bone, as we have said before. 
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; so take the cure. 
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration there arises boils, then make a dressing of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the dressing on top delicately, until the boils are appeased. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate, and put on a plaster of powdered mill with plenty of egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint from the fracture be now stronger, and a bit wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and draw tighter above the fracture than elsewhere, and always looser as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths which are on the fracture be soft and damp, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is drawn be flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and the ligament after a few days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you water the limb with hot water, until the itching is relieved; and let the limb not be tightly restrained. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone detached, and similar things, so the address. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you fear that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a bit and leave it like that for several days until the nourishment comes back and then extract it. 
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not unbind him for 20 days. 
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Where one has a sprain or fracture, and can hold his hands to his neck, and keep his necks equal, and guard against movement and shaking, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand 
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two times there are small breaks, and it does not come but rather weeping many times. 
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it behoves that the patient sits straight, and be directly in front of him equally; then put his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretch the minister bones broken, and place them equal to the mirrors, as long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in a linen towel. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the part of the leg below the belly of the foot, make a sphere out of cloths and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot; then strain with a long cloth, and let the star of heart be as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it is right. 
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is below, it is necessary that you put a splint above, and another below on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie the whole hand around, and tightly bind the ligature between the two. 
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our fingers, if it is the thumb, set it straight as it should be; and take it out with the palm, and if you see that it sets a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in other fingers, as in the index finger or one of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the healthy finger which is next; or tie them all together, holding them tight, or put on a splint, like a pouch; and take care during restoration and placement of hot abscesses, and help those who come to you, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh 
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one ties a bandage above the break, and another below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his linen evenly to his portion; and this is when the fracture is between the bones. 
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one of the ligatures be towards the hip, and the other ligatures below the fracture. 
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be below the knee, and the extension downward; then put the hands on the bone evenly with both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that no abscesses come. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is done in this way. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with bandages doubled two or three times, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels reach the root of the thigh, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn the bandage on the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then apply eight cloths of soft rags between the leg and thigh to make the constriction equal, then begin to bind with three or four turns on the fracture; and when you go higher above the fracture, tighten less; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you have passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, as far as you reach the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this until no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.  
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, so that it loosens and straightens what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grab, then it is necessary to pull them out if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place and extract with force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the thigh broken when one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in this restoration thus made does not ring the patient. 
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions. 
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the path of the knee 
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that on the road of the knee there is often no breaking, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is only a crack or a hole, and occurs with all wounds, and without wound, then it is well felt. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts what is crooked back in its place as much as it can be assembled and moved; then put on plaster, and I put a round splint if you need it, and restrain it as it should be, then observe all the arrangements that we have said for other fractures, such as abscess cautery and other similar things; apply to each accident what is suitable for it until it is healed. 
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg 
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and there are all kinds of breaks as in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, equally so, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, turn them back. 
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain and it is seen clearly; and it turns below. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it straight, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and the alignment according to your skill. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two bandages of wood shavings that can bind the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap it twice with two bandages above and below, and tie it in the middle too, so that at this binding the leg cannot lean to the right or left, and so it is well. And no one shall administer any bandages longer than the leg, and if they are of wood, put them on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this on the fracture where there is a wound; and move the leg every day, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident; cure it until it is healed. 
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones of the foot 
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and become dislocated, and there are many other situations. 
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that a bone in the foot is broken, and you see these bones rising upon each other, so put the sick person's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, then press it so much that they return to their place; then put the plaster and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board with two inches thick, then straighten the foot gradually, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things as needed. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated. 
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, if you restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and it should be one finger wider, then put beneath the foot that table which I have mentioned, and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three, or more, bones broken, put on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table underneath the foot; and let it be placed upon the head of the table under the belly of the foot so that it holds it well. 
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, just as we have said; and treat each accident as it is appropriate. 
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone where the knife 
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline her to the part of her back, and have her held from behind; then fill the cavity of the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as your fist; then unbend the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then the cotton will jump out, as far as it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the fist; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you see that it is not healed, take a bladder of a calf, tie a cane to the opening, and push the whole bladder into the nature; then blow into the cane until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the bone to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for several days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of a man's arm or a woman's is broken, if you restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip; and these near fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and his use to it, and understands my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For fracture, it signifies to him in several dispositions the right way of restoration: understand then. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap bandages around it and leave it for three days or until healed quickly. 
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound 
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that he be cleansed now, so that the cleansings which we have mentioned testify to this. 
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, and there remains vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, so that no abscess comes. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess should come, leave the restoration until a new day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would bring about evil accidents. 
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the chest exposed, it is fitting that you put it straight lightly with your hands, to slight extension. 
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not seem suitable to you for setting equally with your hands, then have this instrument which is of iron, which has VII or VIII in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he imprint III or IV, according to what he may need in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a thick knob, so that it does not bend at compression on the limb in your work, and let it be sharp in front and thick from the middle forward, like this: 
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," for which it is necessary that the curved head be placed on top of the bone that appears; and the end at one time, until it returns, and is made equal to each other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have power. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then use the edge of a suitable instrument for this, either an incisor or a saw, at your power; then cut what remains in the bone with sharpness and small incisions. 
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you have set it back in its place, then moisten the bandage with black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; and do not put any cerate or anything else on the wound where there is oil, lest it should cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering all around according to the quantity of the wound, and be very careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many a foolish barber has done this and caused death or corrosion on the patient, sometimes; and let the strapping be softer and more frequent than for other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, it is not right to put splints on it; but wrap around it, instead of splints, hard cloths, and bind them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the bandage on the wound has become loose, then remove what you have put on top of it all, and put a healing ointment on it, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound. 
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limb be straightened out in such a way that the bone can slide down easily. 
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day they trespass, and he cannot solder but returns there again crookedly, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you widen the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces which cause that pain. 
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when a bone is broken and the fracture appears on the limb, such as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it at all, for death often follows, but leave it until it has decayed; perhaps it will fall away by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the burns which come from the solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb; and by chance, it cannot make the limbs do their natural work. 
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Be careful then if the swelling is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with oil; and put them on the swelling in compresses, and bind it well, and do not untie it for several days; and then remove it, and begin another, until the swelling is removed; or you can bind it to a well-made piece of lead, for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut above it, and make the superfluity appear; or you can shave it with a razor until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after healing 
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterward the limbs weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tight, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and nourishment could not come to the limb; or from a multitude of disturbances; or from movements that are too great, or not done at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, until his blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath, and give him joy and rest; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws to great inflammation, and often bathe it in hot water, until the inflammation subsides in the limb; and returns to its natural shape. 
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted limb after healing 
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish ones have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and the torture are recent, it is fitting that they be softened with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, such as good diachylon, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take fat figs, and crush them with bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling. 
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation removed by continual and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be administered to the limb every hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron, then you must cut to the bone, delicately with a fine knife; and put care and attention into the treatment. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations 
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. 
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When a dislocation occurs to anyone, if it is necessary now to bring it back without delay. 
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb swells, and by chance if one puts it back in place, it will be painful; for this reason, one should not move it while it is swollen: often it brings spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make a poultice for the patient, then leave it until the abscesses are healed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it comes into its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head down to the feet. 
des mandibules	of the jaws 
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It sometimes happens that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are a little loosened from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down toward the ground, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and enfolds his tongue with speech. 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself with several adjustments. 
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay; and in such a way that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put their thumbs into the pocket of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be free, to even it out; and command the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he looks at the bone to make it equal, as long as it returns to its place. 
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, even if both jaws are held together, apply hot water and oil, so that they soften slightly; do not hesitate in resetting it as we have said. 
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening it, then put soft cloths on it in a cerate made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with soft bands; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms should be placed between two cushions so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he exert himself to chew, but takes light food as long as the pains are gone, and the jaws are joined; and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not bother to open his mouth for eating and drinking, as long as the jaw is well joined and healed.  
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back into place within an hour, and are not returned to their positions, then fever and habitual soddenness will come, and by chance loosening of the bowels, and by chance vomiting of pure bile. 
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is lost; and many times they die within nine days. 
de la forcelle	from the fork 
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from within the side of the leg and the foot, and it is dislocated sometimes at the outside, and one feels this well. 
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; then press the place with your palm and it will return; then put a plaster on it and bandage it, and restrain it; and the head which is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it dislocates sometimes, then reset it in its place, as we have said; then put a plaster on it and bandage it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus the same way the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.  
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder 
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the axle below; and the second is at the part of the buttock; and by chance it dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the axle, especially for those who have little flesh, for in these it is quickly dislocated; for those who have enough flesh, it is hardly dislocated, and returns with difficulty. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it sometimes happens that some men have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of it. 
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore it is necessary that you test it until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment. 
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And dislocation is known when it is towards the armpit, and put difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit at the touch the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring back his hand to its nest, nor move by any movements; and also, if it is dislocated above, unless it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is new, or when the child is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand high, then puts their fingers below the armpit and lifts the joint forcefully upward to its place; then the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upward, then puts it down; it will come quickly. 
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in the next few days, then it is fitting that the patient be bathed in hot water; and they be given a soothing and softening lotion, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it be administered; then the patient be laid on their back, and a wool pad of equal thickness be placed under the shoulder blade, neither too soft nor too hard, then the patient place their heel on the pad, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will come back immediately now, and if you see that the resetting is according to this manner: then it is fitting that you have a man present who is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the shoulder blade of the patient, and lift the shoulder blade upwards, so that the patient hangs on the arm; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return now. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting is also done in another way: and it's this, one puts a long coal in the ground, whose head be as round as a pestle, and not too big nor too small; then it is put under the patient, but that he have several cloths above it, and the patient lies along the length of the wood; then his hand is extended downwards on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a coal of two arms in length and four thumbs wide, which has a round head to be able to enter perfectly under the shoulder blade, according to this form:  
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie upon the head of a log two cloths underneath so that he is not bruised, and place it beneath the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm along the length of the log, and tie the shoulder to the log, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on the rung of a ladder wide enough, and let the hand be extended downwards and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return in place now. 
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, it befits you to put under the shoulder a sphere of wool equal, then put plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and yolk of egg, upon all the shoulder and around, then bind it under the shoulder securely, and turn the bandage upon the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it befits that he rest a little, as long as the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then rest more afterward five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and it is not softened, it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been forced out of place by moisture or some other cause, it is necessary that you apply cautery to three holes, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place. 
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation that is near the shoulder blade and breasts or back is made by a push and stretching of the arms, and it is administered in another place; and heals as long as it is healthy. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness of movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until that stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original nature. 
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation one must cut 
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated on all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see it well and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick knife with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is lifted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as abscesses may come, for if abscesses were to come, it would be a nuisance to reset them; and by chance it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death may come. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you extend their hand with your two hands; and their arms should be spread, and the hands turned according to the cut, up and down; and push the joint at its sides together, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and presses from the root of the palm or where the bone is dislocated. 
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and let the one who applies extend the arm, and hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm in every direction; once you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide; and when he looks at the joint, put oil on the joint with his hand to soften it; then push the joint firmly until it returns to its place; and when it is in its place, apply dry plaster with egg yolk, and bind it firmly, and hang the arm at the patient's neck, and leave it for several days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well-bound, start again with the plaster and the bandage and leave it like that for several days, until it is firmly set; then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a greasy sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and let him go into a bath; and when he sweats, if he rubs the joint temperately, then puts the wool on again, and then goes into a bath; and thus do two or three times until he is healed; and if you see that, put on cow dung moistened and warmed with butter, and strain it on; it will return to its position. 
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand 
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, more than the other joints. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is done so that you put the sick hand on a table and extend the ministers' hand, and look at it evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it as far as it will return to its place altogether. Then it is necessary for you to see if it is well in place; then put the sick person's back of their hand on a table, for extension and resetting. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient put the back of their hand on the table, and the healer puts their hand on top of that appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good; but if not, apply soothing poultices to the abscesses and leave them alone so they do not start again. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot suffer it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain crooked; and do not harm the patient any further than that his hand is weakened and cannot grip anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other remedy except to extract with a cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else will work. 
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind it and leave it like that. 
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healed. 
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the wrists of the hand 
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the shoulder joint is dislocated in any direction, sometimes on the back of the palm or in the palm itself; then bend the shoulder and push the dislocation back into its place as far as it will go, then hold the head of the shoulder and pull it towards the part where it is separated; and leave it for two days, and then on that day make it equal.  And at night tie it up, as we have said, and untie it during the day, and move it around, and tie it back up at night; do this often until it becomes tight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand; and do so as you have done before, until it heals. And do the same, when it is dislocated in another part. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Regarding the loosening of the shoulder blade from the back 
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient. 
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the limbs jump suddenly without volition, and he cannot hold them, and often some members are softened, either both thighs or both arms or one; and many times the shins move in four parts; the one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez"; its cure is that you observe whether the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing altogether. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment were said in many words, where there is not much profit in all; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the stiffness that comes to the breast beforehand, neither engine nor feeling; and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure but that properly which comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be extended on his face in an equal place, and have a strain under him, so that he does not bleed; then put one ember at the head in the earth form, and the other at the feet, and tie a strap below the buttocks of the patient, and the other at the haunches, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the straps, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two embers; and let them be well fastened, the ember as we have said, and the minister put his palms on the spine form, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a board three arm's lengths long and place it under the armpit. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should put two firebrands at the head of the patient's bed on one side and two others towards his feet; and between each firebrand above and below a hand's breadth in length; and let there be a hole in each firebrand where the cord runs, and let the firebrands be firmly set in the ground so that they don’t move. And let there be a turning firebrand between each pair of firebrands with which the cord turns; and it should have two small firebrands of a hand's length to turn the cord. Then tie the cord that is among the axles to the turning firebrand towards the head, and the other cord toward the feet to the other turning firebrand, and let each of the attendants turn his turning firebrand at full speed; and let the master place the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equalized, put a drying plaster with plenty of egg white on top, then bandages, and then a splint from a tablet three fingers long, which should cover the area of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the vertebra, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient with gentle nourishment, until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of healing, you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint we have mentioned before; and sometimes administer a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes on the posterior vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation; but it is the bone which appears, for which one should not have any presumption: by chance it would bring death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip 
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come loose through dislocation alone, and not in the same way as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and it is more often dislocated inward, and rarely dislocated front and back. 
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation within is such that when you join the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the ailing knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the ailing one cannot double its knee at the fire; and there is a swelling hot abscess behind, for the head of the thigh comes there.  
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who is coming to die is that this incident is contrary to those before. 
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has it in front are these: if his leg is well according to its fulfillment; however, he does not bend his knee twice without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and he retains his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he passes on his heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it behind are that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs. 
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this kind of dislocation is such that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, there is no cure; and it is not fitting that he should have presumption. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those in whom the dislocation is fresh and there are four types of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint and extend it inside and out and move it to the right and left; perchance it will return and need no other treatment. 
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or with a bandage tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it tightly with a bandage above the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage; and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to treat it according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the thigh, it is necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then put a bandage on the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the knee, then extend the bandage upward toward the knee, and towards the groin; then have another minister hold his arms, and embrace the large part of the sick thigh, and extend it outward in a backward direction: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong cord high above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the ill leg be extended two fists longer than the other; then let it hang from the top of a post, and let it be two arm's lengths above the ground; then command a minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who embraces the lower part of the thigh, for the joint will now return quickly. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is down, lay the patient as we have said for him who has sciatica, and bind the bandage properly on the injured leg, and on the foot also; then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the foot, then insert an ember between the thighs of the patient in a form; and place cloths moistened with wine around it so that he does not burn the patient, then stretch each minister towards him and let the one who looks bind the dislocation equally with his hand. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on a table and press it together as we have said in the gibbosity, and lay the patient down on his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and put your hands on the sore angle, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is not fitting to extend the patient downwards, nor raise him up on the ground, but he should be as if his shoulder were dislocated upwards, as we have said about lying on both hips; and he should be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be set when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind him with a bandage so that the shoulder does not move; and he rests for three days or four, then unbind him, and apply the plaster on top; and if you see that they are equal, bind him as before, and leave him for three days; then unbind him, and let him walk well, as long as the limb is comfortable. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of knee dislocation 
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and draw between your thighs, then bend the two sides where the knee forms; and another minister extends his foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at his thigh lightly; and put the plaster on it, and make the leg air at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then untie it; and let the patient not bother to walk, as long as the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not set, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed 
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel 
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talon is sometimes loosened, and sometimes completely dislocated, within and without. 
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tense before the part where it is dislocated; the resetting should be gentle, and one must gently stretch the limb with his hands when he is only relaxed. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated altogether, it is fitting that you make the patient sit upright, and hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle; then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot up nicely; and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix a strong pole firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around, so that they do not hurt the patient; then have one minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with a rope which they tie above the ankle of the foot; then each minister stretches equally, and the pole is now placed between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when it is stretched; then place the ministers' hands equal to the dislocation, and have another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is firm, apply the plaster and bandages on top, and hold them in place, and bind the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves which are above the ankle behind so that the bandages are not too tight; then leave it for II days or III, and if the bandages loosen, tighten them; then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for IV days; and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed. 
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they fit together well, extend them without effort, and this is a light matter. 
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straight and put your foot on what appears of those joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns; and when it is even and nothing appears, put under the sole of the foot a table with two legs, then strain it strongly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together 
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, do not dare; and use at the beginning soothing things, hot poultices, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope of health.
Amen	Amen 
