O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its expositions and its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say “surgery”.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so it is lost and broken down, and nothing remains of the strength except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came error and vanity, and understandings are closed, and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. 
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.  
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for whoever undertakes this to be instructed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of each, and their movement and of the veins moving and resting, and of the place from which they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is much, and with practice is little; 
et meismement en l’art de main.	and the same in the art of hand.  
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, beware lest he fall into error and harm people; 
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	just as I have wanted many times more than those who interfere with this science and abandon themselves without science and experiment. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish barber who cut open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck. 
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands. 
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another barber who treated a stone of a man of age, and the stone was large; 
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another barber who took in charge the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; 
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant barber removed the fracture on top of the wound with strong ligatures, and did not leave the wound any dressing, and left it like that until the end; 
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded him not to unbind it;  
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and let it remain so until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called upon to come to him, and I hastened to come and undo the leg; 
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I dislocated it, it was so easy and he felt no pain.  
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But the corruption of the whole limb had already been confirmed, and I could not heal it; 
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.  
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another example where it drained an ulcerated abscess, and then inflamed because of its lord's malice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not right to touch it with iron unless it is in a part where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear son, you must know that surgery is divided into two parts: 
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in several ways;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger. 
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which reason it is necessary for you to be careful, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you. 
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your arms in good conscience, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; 
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave the incurable diseases to God's will.  
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your tools from those who make you doubt, and have faith so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen said in some of his admonishments: 
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on a bad illness unless you are called foolish." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the shapes of instruments, and of the bindings for cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; 
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; 
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments. 
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember our work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm for each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest discourse and subtlest science and the most secret responses; 
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many sages spoke about this and agreed on it;  
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions:  
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It is to know hot complexions without matter, and dry complexions without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, they divided none and said that the cautery is a great help; 
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite: 
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that the cautery is only worth for illnesses that come from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with heat or dryness, a hot illness.  
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And those who said the opposite say that the cautery is a great help for hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any way, do not interfere unless those who have tried it and who know by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the space of time; 
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other complexions, even cold and moist diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the unguents assembled and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery together with fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than a cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out except to the limb that is cooked, and does not harm another limb if it be named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Hot medicines come from one member to another while pushing away, and bring to the member diseases of painful healing;  
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And by chance they kill the sick person. 
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire because of its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.  
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this have I found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the greenness of things.  
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this reason I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is contained in fire and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases from bodies as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Or receive it in your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be made, and they emerged pricked.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that the cautery is suitable at all times, because the resulting harms are lessened by the help of the cautery. 
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And likewise, if the cauteries are for necessary pains, urgent and pressing, that cannot await the time when greater harm may come to the limb.  
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish barbers do; 
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for a disease that is healed by cautery has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say so. 
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not as they think, for cauteries are but a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and are worth more than medicine for its quick effectiveness, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.  
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the illness may come at some times according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; 
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And the superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if this is not done, apply cauteries in the place where he has much superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and some pain does not return at all; 
mais ce avient poc.	But this rarely happens. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it is this;  
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauteries are of value after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last of medicine because when we administer ways of healing in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish minds.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are milder than of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its height of substance. 
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the burning of a cautery does not cause rot, but this is not true for I have tested it and found it to be true in some men. 
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they said. 
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly. 
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if one heats it too much; 
si font au feu;	it will melt in the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there are enough obstacles.  
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our fire cautery, which we have made suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	With an olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two that are made because of an illness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and the ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patients are purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III humors or IV according to what the virtues and the ailment and the custom of the patient can suffer. 
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then make the patient's head fall back. 
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs. 
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Then put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; 
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds a little then heat the cautery which is called "olivary," of which this is the shape: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move downward while squeezing your hand bit by bit in a twisting motion; 
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand slowly, and observe the place to see if you see a little bone.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; 
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a piece of silk, put it in warm and soft cotton, and place it on the area, and leave it for three days. 
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then place softened linen in butter;  
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it on until the burn is removed. 
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrapharmacon," until it is healed.  
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients say that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; 
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore it is helped to move.  
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must leave the cautery long enough so that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it should be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should leave the cautery on for so long and press so hard that it lowers from the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their distaffs so that the humors are stirred out.  
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And one should leave the wound open for a long time; 
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Afterward one must clean and cauterize. 
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; 
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it out; 
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; 
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is safer and milder for me, and it is from this that I work in consequence to salvation altogether. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head, and oils, and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if they do it with the cautery as we have previously said, and it is not worth anything. 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the head of the patient is of strong constitution and that he is not too cold; 
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize below the cautery a bit as we have said above. 
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterward, do the cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have previously said, and do the cautery where it is called “vessels”; 
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And these are the places where one applies cupping glasses.  
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	And position your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: 
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more delicate than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form: 
dou cautere dou chief	from the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by purifying medicines, and the other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, and all this does not help at all: 
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then do cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with hot medicines and fire. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	Cauteries with hot medicines are done as follows: you take a piece of aloe, remove the bark and cut it into a small piece the size of your fingernail, then place the temple where the pain is located in half so that you can put the aloe piece under the skin. 
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is placed, hold it well and leave it like this for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then untie it and apply a clove of garlic on top, and leave the wound like that for two or three days. 
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put it on cotton soaked in butter as much as possible. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure of anointing until it is healed; 
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that this cauterization with any burning medicines that I have written or doses to treat with burning medicines. 
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "close" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a small curve, and in the middle a small appearance; 
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little, so that half of the thickness of the core is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundantly with blood. 
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterward place cotton in oil of flaxseed, and put it on the area for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then he puts moistened cotton in butter, and then heals the place with ointment until it is healed. 
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "culterella," at its very point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not old. 
de emigraine	from migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure a migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "culterella" until it is white; 
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and draw thus a line half an inch long on the painful spot, and remove your hand once, and be careful not to touch the artery and do not go as far as the bone; 
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jawbone that moves when one eats, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and even for him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; 
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work in half way; 
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it applies. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; 
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see [it], administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has worked with dissolving medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pointing to all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is held in both, and you remove a bit from its root of the ear then after you have marked the place for the incision;  
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and make ten points around each ear; 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the area until it is healthy. 
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torment which must be treated by cautery is none other than those that are moved by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not perform cautery on things that seem to come from dryness and spasm of nerves. 
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this kind of torment that moves from phlegm with draughts and purges of the head and gargles, and this is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: 
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one in the root of the ear, and another a burn behind the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; 
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and cauterize it on the head of the ear above a burn below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; 
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on it until half of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery: 
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the knife that we have placed before, but it is a more subtle point, and the knife should be a thicker point; 
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterward, treat the area as I have said before, until it is healed.  
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the paralysis is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: 
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	It is on the two horns of the head, and one with the head, and one at the place which is called “vessels” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach 
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and it should be treated as we have said before. 
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is fitting to give the patient large herbs and pills that modify the brain.  
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	Afterwards, raise the head of the patient all the way, and put mustard plaster on the back of the head as it is written or treated in the treatise of plasters. 
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the manner of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said. 
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healed thus, well and good.  
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not healed, make three cauteries from the temple of the head descending to the neck, and have a space of two large fingers between each cautery. 
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and the cure as the others, and if you see swelling there, and the patient is suffering, then apply the cautery in the middle; 
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if needed, two others on the two horns, and cauterize until it is healed;  
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be called "olive," as I have said before. 
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of herbs and of what we have said before; 
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after you raise the head of the patient, then apply the cautery between the head and on each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck; 
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back;  
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the strongest heat is felt, then lift your hand. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the cautery until it is healed, and let the cautery be called "olive" as we have said before. 
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery fire except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffering from a lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then make him gargle and chew often modifying the brain with good meats; 
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after he raises his head in the middle, and makes the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; 
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and suffering, then make cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have said.  
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, make a subtle cautery for him according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or the moistures corrupted and phlegm thick, then the cautery of iron cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist then he should drink things so that his brain is purified according to what has been said previously in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After asking about the head of the sick person; 
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Then make a linen tourniquet well, also as the circle, and put it around the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the patient must be crossed, and held well on all sides; 
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Then present the linen, and worth of old beeswax ointment.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And heat it over a moderate fire so that he who applies it can endure it; 
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Then empty the circle inside around the head and leave it to cool. 
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once a week with good management until he is healed.  
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see the cautery burn too many times with one application of the hot iron.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterization softens the brain properly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then put softened cotton in butter and gelatin fat.  
de l’awe des eulz	from the eye of the arrows
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes as the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and keep him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Then he commands him to put his head back and cauterize around the head and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the ailment is in both of them together or one if the descent is in one. 
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; 
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it as best you can. 
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision how to staunch it; 
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never make a cautery or cauterize below the two bones behind.  
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are upon the veins or near the arteries that are on the appearance of the head outside
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is superfluous cold phlegmatic things, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter descending to the eyes:  
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where the hair grows under the two bones. 
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if there is more need, then I cauterize slightly above the eyebrow with all small cauteries. 
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the body of tears by within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you give him medicine according to what we have said in the division, and he does not profit, then let the patient drink three nights of cochineal. 
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After you shave his head, and make him cauterize with half an olive cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hairs; 
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.  
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cautery of this instrument which is called “olivary” should be used.
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are. 
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let go of the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	When a hair points at the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to red, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: 
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.  
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; 
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your lap; 
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	then draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; 
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then he puts softened cotton in egg white and parsley decoction on the eye, then he heats the cautery which has this shape: 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the shape that you have marked dot by dot many times, so that the flesh is burned at that spot; 
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise at the point of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days, then he puts softened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; 
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterward the care of anointing until it is healed. 
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if afterward the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on that same spot again, as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are scorched, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and they do not prick the eye. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning medical cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a shape from parchment the size of a myrtle leaf. 
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one drachm, and grind them together well. 
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it hastily on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it on the paper.  
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the ailment is only in one eye, then you should work on that one, and if in both, as well. 
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place softened cotton under the eye with egg white.  
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And let the flesh of the patient be in good health and put your hand showing on the medicine, and press it a little and move it all the times that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels a bite as of fire. 
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite has passed, if you lift the place of awe, and look to see if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision. 
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it is so, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, put more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set right. 
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put softened cotton in butter on it until the heart burns are healed, afterward cure the place of the ointment which is called “diafensis” and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well in your work with great care so that none of the medicine falls into his eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that spot which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the poultice of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that are your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And let not the right way be answered to him whose is the study of this art. 
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the healing of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your bosom;  
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor shake his head; 
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then put softened cotton in albumin of egg or in juice of parsley on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After you heat the cautery which is like this: 
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped at the head like the form of a dove's feather, together with which the cautery should be. 
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see that it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see that it is also like a tent. 
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But nevertheless, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Afterward press the fistula if it is open and draw out the corruption and dry it. 
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, open it and draw out the pus. 
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Afterward put the hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where there is no fire above the oil, so that your hand does not shake.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the fat of oil, and corrupt it. 
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery right to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, begin the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; 
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Afterward he puts it on soft cotton with butter, and cures the ointment desiccant until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on a corrosive water medicine until the bone is uncovered. 
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And he heals according to what would come in his chapter.  
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistulas which none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand a fistula, and make the place; 
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Afterward put in the incision one subtle camamile of which this is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	And make it to the quantity of one-third of an ounce; 
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	And hold your hand or the camamile firmly, and let neither the patient nor anything move, lest the melted lead runs to his oil; 
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is fitting that one put moistened cotton on the patient's eye in water or in wine. 
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The fistulous place will heal quickly and wonderfully by health.  
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer an opening at the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body at the nose according to what is fitting in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times fissures occur in the lips which are called "hairs," and likewise in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices of those that we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small surgical cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it immediately into those cavities until it reaches the bottom; 
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, treat the place with wax until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the jaw or in the eye socket, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and decayed and become old and turns into a fistula; 
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help at all: 
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is fitting that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	afterward, make a hole or opening in the fistulous tract, and hold your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it and the other place;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed; 
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated this way, it is good; 
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter. 
dou movement des dens	of the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but to no avail, then put the head of the patient in your lap; 
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	afterwards heat the cautery, which will be shown later in part, so that you put a cane on the tooth; 
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and quickly put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand there until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; 
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After the patient fills their mouth with salt water, let them hold it for an hour and then spit it out. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or wind, and remedies do not work, then one must use a cautery according to two methods: 
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery with butter and cautery with fire. 
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is such that you take cow butter and put a bit on the end of an iron or steel spoon; 
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a needle, moisten it with boiled butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth and hold it until it cools; 
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moist wool and cotton soaked in cold butter are put on the aching tooth, and a hot iron is placed on it until the fire reaches the crown of the tooth. 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or wood, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; 
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	Then heat the cautery, from which the shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; 
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then refresh it further; 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever shape you wish, and according to what you have power;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the shape of the cane: 
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and is not amenable to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery head so that the following shape comes, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery. 
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; 
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; 
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and place moistened cotton with butter on it until the burn is gone. 
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the site with ointments and dressings until it is healed.  
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture overcomes the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged with laxative medicines; 
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a spot. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you make the other cautery at the juncture of the neck and head of the spine, let the cauteries be called "clavile," as we have shown the shape before. 
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.  
de la toust	from the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all the diseases of the lungs are from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the illness is old, make two cauteries on the shoulder blades in their hollows.  
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And another cautery between the two nipples.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the shape which has been said before. 
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see [it], make a cautery by pricking with all the cautery which is called "points" whose form is shown before in the disease of the ears; 
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points be up to XXX, or thereabouts.  
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the place according to what is said before it, and let the cautery be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason are the cauteries lighter, because you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, turn the patient onto his back and onto his side; 
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the heart that is inside the little bone with the two fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two nerves just like this is the form: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries will come;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this is made a cautery with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves: 
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is it applied on top of this nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the cautery heated coals with string; 
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after make the patient rest, and let not the limbs be moved for a long time until he is well recovered.  
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come into the stomach, so that they draw it from its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and customary treatments do not help, then the patient must be turned onto their back and extend their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then afterwards make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the quantity of a penny, to all the cautery nail-shaped, and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and have half a space between one and the other so they are not joined together when they will rot;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and are the cauteries so perfect that they purge the two parts of the core, and is the shape of the cauteries according to this form without alteration: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cautery burn within the stomach according to this form; 
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And whoever has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at a point according to the amount you see fit; 
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "points". 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is forced out of its natural constitution by excesses; 
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured by what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be purged on his own height; 
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign three cauteries according to this form and figure and amount on the liver, defying the hypocondria, where the ribs of the man come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be a space between each cautery the thickness of a penny. 
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries. 
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and only half of the heart should be burned, and let the patient stand upright on his feet. 
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.  
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, you may cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry up the whole body.  
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not reach the bowel, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you will know by seeing. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: 
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe; 
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, they feel very intense pain.  
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment requires purging, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then mark the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, like this shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and the pus comes out, until the opening is all clear;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatments of herbs until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not fitting that anyone uses this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these illnesses have cured many times. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then one can work boldly, and nonetheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleural effusion
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauteries of aristolochia roots, in this way. 
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long aristolochia root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm. 
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And soften it in oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the foreskin and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part below the beard.  
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind. 
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cautery near the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two more on each side of the breast behind the cautery that is between the shoulders. 
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand down, but make it open as if smelling.  
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients say that a man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. 
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And thus the pain ceases, as we have said in the case of a liver abscess. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patients die now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatments we have mentioned, and it does not profit, then you must apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the abscess, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before.  
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient often turn onto their back. 
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two points, as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation. 
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And lift the heart which is located near the abscess, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevation from which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.  
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After he pierces the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus he will have four. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, if you cauterize with the whole cautery at three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has festered for a long time, this is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is of no use to someone with dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit, then it is necessary that you make him four cauteries around the shoulder, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cauteries be very close to the hope of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterward leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to avoid putrefaction, and do not leave the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one we have shown before.  
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back is oval-shaped, according to what has been put down before. 
de l’enfleure des piez	from the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and are full of clear yellow fluid, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; 
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and apply your hand with the cautery without turning.  
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so that you do not compress the yellow wax, and let the cautery be of this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife; 
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; 
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries exposed for a long time without cleaning so that it can dry out. 
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of the other treatments that we have mentioned. 
de la menoison	From the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by ordinary remedies; 
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much greening (bile), then make a large cautery on the stomach as has been spoken of before or a circling cautery of the stomach. 
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauteries around the belly, subtle and all with a delicate point, and two cauteries on the thighs. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, burn them on the shoulder, and burn each one, and two small burns on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and are old and composed of large, cold, and damp corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said by division, and it does no good, then make cauteries. 
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III on the spine of the back, that which is all behind below the shoulder blade bit by bit in a triangular shape, and I cauterize below the elbow II twice. 
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face we apply a large cautery to the stomach as it has been previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the whole cautery. 
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the cautery uncovered for a long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you apply an athlet, if it is heated so that it resembles a razor, and then put it all inflamed on the athlet applied; 
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And leave it until your hand and the cautery reach the origin of the vein, so that the blood stops.  
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said. 
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment of wounds while they are healing. 
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the wound, it will be of greater help. 
de plaie mal curee	from a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will recount in their place, then comes a certain illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there comes a fistula, and it is old and has putrid and corrupting moisture, you must first test with a subtle probe and keep track of how deep the probe goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the pus has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the dead and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times according to the quantity needed. 
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these places, and do not cauterize except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not a piercing. 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After healing the place until it is healed, and if the pus is drained, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healed. 
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not removed, know that the place is infected and the bone rots at the base.  
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And as one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the sickness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes as a result of great windiness and does not take any pleasure in women, then you must make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the small cautery that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line and they will make greater help. 
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder where the pubic hair begins, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of one thumb. 
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make him do the cautery on his back, where you need it. 
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cautery be sharp according to the shape previously mentioned. 
de la marris	Of the sea
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:  
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the vulva, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauteries on his back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said. 
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together. 
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And when the place of the separation is found, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle and mark in front of the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle. 
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And let the cautery be such as that with which one cauterizes the stomach. 
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present to you, make three large cauteries from olive wood, and let the cautery be as perfect as all hearts.  
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the bone of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure is not worth it, and the illness is old: 
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills. 
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you do the cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: 
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which some are such: 
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	That you cauterize upon the box of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large ones, and there be between each cautery space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; 
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Once done we make a cautery in the middle upon the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if the cautery is applied with a circle as we have previously said for the dislocation of the hip; 
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the flesh around the core is burned. 
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle, four must be made on the left side with a dot. 
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And the cauteries should be lancet-shaped, and the thickness of the flesh should be burned;  
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near the end of his foot, then cauterize him where he feels the pain three points or four with a cautery called "points". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do it again. 
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do it with a knife cautery or a circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauteries so that you do not leave the cautery long enough to burn the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient more pain and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purge of the stomach from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the surgeons say about the cautery of the hip, which is the manner, make a tool and let its head be as thick as a doctor's nail or a little less, and let it have between the crosspieces and from one crosspiece to another the space of the size of a fingernail. 
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the crosspieces be opposite in two parts and also like knots, and it has a well-made iron handle. 
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	Let it be warmed until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the affected hip bone, and turn it on the healthy side. 
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	And let the cautery burn once, when the cautery is hot, and leave it for three days. 
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	Then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment with anointing until it is healed.  
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albucasim says that we use this cautery very little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone using it. 
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And nevertheless, this is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning medicine cautery is such that you make an instrument with crossbars where the edge of the door descends, and it is made of iron or steel with a long side, and at the height it has two notches, and between each one there is the thickness of a finger. 
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and let them be opened by fire above, and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Then place the box on the hip of the patient lying on his sound side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; 
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then put between the two circles of the hot awl that has been heated in the fire for a moment, and leave it there for an hour or so, allowing the patient to suffer the heat and burning. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there will be as much biting pain as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the biting pain has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hip awl gently, and leave it like this for three days, applying butter until that part which is blackened by the burning is removed; 
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it stand for three days so that putrefaction sets in;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds so long as they are healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that you have made for the hip in the same way. 
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot coals, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	Where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And put one pot over the other well-sealed, and put alkali and lime and gentle heat on top, so that there are two above the powders until you have heated it well in your hand. 
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And leave it like that until hot water and steam descend into the sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it over lime and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very sharp and is administered for many medical works and for other members' cauteries. 
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes a work like fire, and with other medicines that we cauterize well the hip like turpentine and honey of Anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a remedy by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and praised it greatly, and said that no other remedy was done, and that he was healed at once when this remedy was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in a part manner that you take some green and fresh litharge, and grind it very much with a bit of fat, and put on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it. 
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let it enter a bath so that its body is a little warmed up, and let it enter a bed, and the pain will go away entirely and it will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cautery for such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of humors.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hairs, it helps a lot. 
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it must be done in a part manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb and the other finger which is called the knuckle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After you take goat's horn, and put it to fire until it is charcoal, and place it on wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. 
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do it again in the same way, and do not stop doing so until you think by sense that it reaches up to the hip, and that the pain has ceased. 
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat". 
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar cold matter spread out, none of these cases are worth cautery except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is fitting after this that the patient is purged with fetid pills or other such things, which are made on his back, where the pain resides, three lines marked by an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; 
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and it should be made as a cautery which is called "points".  
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make III or IV cauteries with a medium-sized cautery iron according to this form: 
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often comes upon small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight throat when they rise, and fear; 
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find in the last spine of the back, and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines. 
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you are about to treat it, cauterize with a hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery brands each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a hot iron two or three lines, and the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery in a gibbosity which is in the spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pains are from moist humors that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the foot, which physicians properly call "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this way: 
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-sized according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need for you to grip on the face of the foot, make the burn with all the heat that one calls "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee from each part, with all olive oil cauteries. 
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand too strong except until the thickness of a grain of wheat is burned.  
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knee and the back, administer to him the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make dots around the wrist two lines long; 
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is still pain in the arms, make dots on each joint and on the hair of the hand.  
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good treatment to the patient and take medicine.  
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good treatment and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the facial bone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes in the groin, and the bowels descend to the buttocks and it is new, then you must, when you see him healed, that he does not eat that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and let him use things that loosen the belly so that the fevers descend from his belly. 
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are repaired, and reset them at your will, and place a sign below the break on the bone where the dagger went in, and at any mark that resembles half of a circle above the body; 
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery which has this shape:  
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and drips clear fluid.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels in their place; 
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and have the assistant hold his hand so they do not return backwards; 
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well on the patient's thighs, and put a cushion and a sergeant under his thighs, and another under his armpit which holds his hands; 
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you get to the bone. 
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery. 
que tu ne le brulasses;	That you do not burn it. 
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	And so that the patient does not die or suffer other ills. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also large according to their size;  
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, treat the area around the cautery with butter until the burn is gone. 
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After that treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well closed. 
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his nourishments be left long, so that the eyeball does not protrude when he will go to the chambers. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he will want to rise, let him be given a well-made bandage and wear it for forty other days. 
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And he should have good rest, work little, and beware of too much drinking and eating, and of shouting too loudly. 
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the treatment of the tailbone in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When tumors come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any more, make a cautery with a cautery according to its quantity, and burn a third of the core.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the cure according to what we have said; 
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first sign the place of the incision and make a line across its width above the fracture, and another behind it, and hold your hand steady over the whole cautery iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, and its virtue, and its location of twists and turns and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is healed by the first cautery, it is good; 
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If not, begin another cautery on top of it, for this custom is that it must change to the member which is closest, for which it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healed. 
de meselerie	from the art of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mesail are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and the same disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see it cauterized, be careful if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: 
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	One in the middle of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair;  
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape. 
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand remain there so that the cautery reaches the bone and so that the scabs come out, so that the vapors of the thick humors can be released; 
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the spot according to what is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the inflammation is spread everywhere; 
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly wasting away, then you should cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned above, and one cautery on the top of the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back and one large one on the rump and another below, and two on the two shoulders; 
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands; 
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard against the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them; 
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never apply the cautery on the bone where the dagger struck, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when you do more cauterizing, you do more good, and increase the benefit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already all corrupted.  
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in a manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing, wash the wound with flour of beans mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in a limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then apply cautery on the limb according to the size of the limb; 
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauteries be a small puncture entering the thickness of the flesh;  
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes one does cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve that moves the limb emerges, and thus the swelling is removed. 
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And in all ways let no one interfere unless they are knowledgeable of the limbs and the origins of the nerves that move the body. 
de albaras	From aloes
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness called “albaras” is chronic, and medicine has no effect, then cauterize a spot with a cautery iron, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.  
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then cure with flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a dove and blood of an almond, of each one part. 
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be mixed all together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it air in place until it is healed. 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears, and you see it stop growing, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nevertheless the wise say that one should also apply cautery to the middle of the ulcer; 
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen several times; 
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and more rightly the thing is that it should be cauterized around, with a cautery called "circular", as we have said in speaking of types of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness that is called "adubelati," and it lingers due to the excess that it causes or due to the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old), and he has little blood, or due to time; 
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening to die 
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then let the cautery burn around with many small burns, pricking. 
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it thus. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce all the way through with the cautery, heat the cautery as follows.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness which is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it behind in such a way that the course of the decay is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of illness there is which is called "corrodent", and it is nothing else but a devouring of a limb, for it gnaws the limbs as fire gnaws dry twigs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what suits the place where the illness is; 
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards cauterize from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply a cauterized poultice softened with oil to the burns so that the burning sores are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of wounds generating flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, that's good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, start the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted flesh. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this condition has sometimes been cured with medicinal water in place of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for the malady of fever in the division. 
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the purples that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that by fire comes a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large foul thing which bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know the fire cautery, and the hot iron cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery point as thin as a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can pierce nails from all sides, and that it has subtle edges. 
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	Afterwards, you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail.  
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And leave it like this for three days until it begins to rot. 
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a plaster of wild mallows ground with salt and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place of the wound by anointing with fat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by fire the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then you must administer a hot cautery to them. 
et est en teil maniere:	And it is in this manner: 
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a cane of iron or a feather of vulture, and put it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say for warts. 
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And put the cane on it so that it encompasses everything around, then put a piece of hot coal on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the way of the hot coal deep down to the root;  
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure the bite of the hot coal for an hour. 
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like that, and it will come out by the roots.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do one after another, until you have removed all those that are on the body, then treat the wounds which generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. 
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with olive oil cautery; 
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	This will stop the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold illness. 
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear through fire baths or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupt substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	It is fitting in the first place, when they appear, that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the point of which is held in the fire, or of a long aristoloche root, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.  
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And always cauterize them at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they will not be able to grow further forward, but the superfluities from which they come are broken down, and they are healed. 
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the fire, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; 
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grievous thing to staunch. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is quieted under your finger, and that no drop issues anymore; 
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put to the fire several small and large olive cauteries until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped up. 
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps when you lift your hand from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, immediately take another cautery which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to do one after another until the blood is drained. 
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.  
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows freely from the artery, one cannot properly rejoin it, especially if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods which we have described. 
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong ligature of thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to rejoin blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be tied and strained carefully. 
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tightening of bandages or applies hot objects, or other similar things, it will not profit him nor the patient.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is rejoined above the wound and above the vein. 
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move the wound, but moisten it with cold water often as cold as possible until the blood is frozen and thickened and rests. 
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make inquiries beforehand about those who need to be cauterized and medicated. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures by incision
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where it is fitting to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and the incisions and the causes and instruments and forms of cauteries. 
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have placed this chapter from the top down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that those who want it can find it more easily. 
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there often occurs evacuation of blood when opening a vein and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die. 
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if some come who are so frightened by their illness that they die easily because of the fear they find in their illness and its severity. 
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one must be afraid of these. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are some who give you their senses and say:  
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am cured." 
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is insidious.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It does not suit you to consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not offer foolishly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and whom you can take and lose. 
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to which health is converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to acquire great renown, glory, and lasting remembrance. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordained this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to that which is before, or the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head even to the feet so that you may more easily find that of which you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A head full of sharpness
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too forcefully. 
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it comes from an unknown cause. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this ailment except in children, and all those I have seen hastened death; 
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me better to leave these cures to others.  
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulders were full of pain, and whose head grew larger each day until it could no longer support it; 
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the diaphragm, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the works are such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split near the head a wide crack; 
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should also be as long as two of us, as long as the moisture runs; 
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see this shape of the spatula:  
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the sharp pain jumps forward when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered to you: 
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is fitting that you split near the head three fissures according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After removing the splits with cloths and powders, and he puts wine and oil, and leaves it like that until the fifth day; 
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then he unties it, and heals the wound with bandages and ointments, and leaves the head even, and gives the patient dry meat free of moisture to eat as long as the limb is strengthened and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and its gathering of sharpness; 
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never in front; 
aucune fois derrier;	never behind; 
aucune fois en destre;	never to the right; 
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the left. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore cut where the abscess appears, and the gathering of sharpness, and make the incision according to what power you have in it; 
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to sever an artery;  
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let the vein flow blood so that the patient dies from the depletion of blood and evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	From rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a sickness called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the breast, and the sickness is old, and medicine does not help, then the last resort is to cauterize with copper the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you have cut them, it is fitting for the patient to put his head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then remove the cloth from the patient's neck. 
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and the lobes of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are filled. 
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the lobes with an incision, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the vein reaches the bone, and this is done by the breadth of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it should through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if blood flows continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space in three fingers, then mark and cut to the bone; 
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the quantity of blood to be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound: 
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone with a slight pain, cut it so that pus does not come, then dress the wound and bandage it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	from a migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old headache comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and a head cold and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medicine cures and all that does not profit him at all, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is such that the patient should shave the hairs from his temples, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is more full outside than in some men who are too cold; 
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is full, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; 
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatulum of which this is the shape: 
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and detach it well from the membranes that are beneath it on each side; 
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is delicate, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two sides.  
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if she is not copied, then it will never jump all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And treat the blood from the sixth hour until the third. 
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that decay does not come before the wound heals and blood flows. 
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery to the bone until the flesh is cut. 
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the best work if the patient does not have a fever and they are of a hot complexion.  
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauteries help to finish the humors: 
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for this reason it is of greater help against the humors.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the place with old cotton and put well-made tents on top. 
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are loosened, let it be treated with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with bandages, until it is healed; 
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if without cutting the artery as much as you work, so hurry to cauterize it, or apply vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; 
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this, place your finger on the area until the blood is congealed, and apply a sharp cold to the area so that the blood stops, and it is removed as it should be; 
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but the sharp points should be well spaced to keep their heat longer.  
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be a space of one finger width between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two areas, and place the hot iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. 
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they shall be kept apart between the two heads for it is not soldered by this cautery at all. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery: 
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are running down the veins that are on the top of the head, and no remedy of medicine profits, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and his forehead shaking as if in a shiver; 
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if they are swollen and moist so that the hairs of the papers are falling out, and the papers are being scorched and burned by the heat of the tears, then this remedy is needed. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "the bruised remedy," and it is that you make at the back of the patient who has this illness three incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead. 
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be as it should go all along the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others let them be along the ribs above the papers, and beware of incising the arteries which are along the ribs above the papers 
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and remove your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across joined 
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready a piece of sponge and much linen for wiping the blood, then put the spatula sharp on two parts as follows is its shape  
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision;  
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape away all the flesh which is between the two incisions at all the tissue which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract with force this spatula. 
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first fissure, it is very sharp on one side and dull on the other; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp edge towards the flesh burned at the heart, and the rounded edge towards the bone, and push until it comes to the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to those so that the incision is continuous until it reaches those which open onto the heart, and then likewise make in the middle a split until the other side. 
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract the blood equally, and press the place so that the blood is taken up. 
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put on cloths softened in wine and oil and ash, and keep that no abscesses come there. 
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day untie the bandage, and he will administer a large poultice of hot water, then cure it with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	where the eyes are
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone has an acute catarrh accustomed to it, and you see the eyes are swollen and small, and weaken the vision, and the papers are burned.  
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And the hair falls out, or the head aches with sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; 
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then know by these signs that these humors and phlegm do not come from only one vein, and the best cure for it is this. 
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to place his hand behind his forehead, then make a large incision between the forehead and a broad space on the cheek.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin at the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the cut be down to the bone; 
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move when one chews;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then put cotton wool between the two edges of the incision, and bind it with linen cloth; 
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you must rub the bone until fresh flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents which promote the growth of flesh.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner: 
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster. 
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And administer it to these wounds in order to draw out flesh throughout. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Either grain, or beast, or stone from a mine, or similar thing such as iron. 
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Or seed, such as acorns, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or flowing things such as water and saliva and similar things. 
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is a stone or another manner of thing in the ear that does not fit in the ear nor grow in it, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of oil of violets or oil of sesame seed, then administer extraction. 
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make it sneeze by compressing, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. 
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear above. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times comes fever from this treatment; 
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come fever, administer extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps fever with tweezers, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, administer extraction with a fine lancet of small sharpness; 
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not jump by this, make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or the hole of the ear strongly, and stuff what is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; 
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then the fever will form, for many times fever comes as we have said; 
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come fever in any way, take glutin with which birds are caught, and put into some instrument suitable for this, and put a piece of cotton around;  
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the buttocks onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw hard. 
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out with all the things we have said, then hasten to slit the ear just as you would an abscess that is hot or a spasm. 
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of the slitting is that you first make the patient dizzy from the cephalic vein, and draw out some blood according to his constitution. Then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small slit at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; 
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the slit be crescent-shaped, so that you reach the bone, then suck out the pus according to your ability, and quickly suck it into your mouth; 
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue the treatment until it is healed.  
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grain that is within and it swells, then administer extraction; 
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, delicate spatula according to this form:  
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; 
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with delicate pincers and a syringe, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	When a patient has sharp pain in the ear, it is necessary for them to first use sneezing as a remedy and generously fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on the same ear where the pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps forcefully through this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them a little over the fire; 
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place the patient's ear in a hole or opening, and press on it with his feet from the other side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear; 
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop doing this stone by stone until all the pain is gone, and so it will all be gone; 
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see it, take the joint, and put one of the heads into the ear, and take the other head and heat it with fire until the softer joint is burned; 
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then redo another part of other joints until all the pain is gone, as we have said in the stone. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	For the extraction of a small animal, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; 
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large enough to be felt, use pincers for its extraction;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	For the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we discuss distillations, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sunlight: 
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are any worms, take them out with delicate pincers; and if there are none, take the cane whose form is this: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	Insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then suck up the whole cane; 
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, stuff cotton around the cane as I have said for the stone; 
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or a treatise on distillations; 
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, whose form is this as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether of silver or iron three holes are below at the small openings, and above covers for distilling. 
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press the distillation inside, there is an iron instrument well made for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap cotton around the point.  
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then put your oil or juice in it, and whatever medicine you see fit in the cane, and hold the cane to the ear. 
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then put the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or reaches the ear. 
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the patient smell it inside, and whether the distillation is a bit heated by the fire or not, you distill it into the ear.  
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have some perforation in their ears; 
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens to adults by rupture of a wound, or from a splinter lodged in the ear, and this rupture sometimes comes perfectly within the ear, if one cannot see it; 
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes a small piece of fire obstructs the perforation, and one sees it well.  
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes perfectly within and cannot be seen is a grievous ailment in many conditions, and in this case it is fitting that you place the patient's ear in the sun; 
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:  
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the apparent obstruction, if the work has all this sputum, this is its form: 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	It should be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not injure the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the hair is from the flesh or earlobe, hold it with delicate pincers and clip lightly until all of the hair is removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is performed perfectly in the ear, then take a delicate razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the hair which causes pain to the patient's ear, pierce lightly and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear. 
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.  
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with ground vitriol. 
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear is swollen, it is necessary that you remove the tent and insert another moistened with cerate made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding, which are or treatments of distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the flesh of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This instrument which comes on papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is fitting that you extend them with pincers and forceps, and the cup of a spatula from its roots; 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put on the place powdered vitriol. 
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without cutting off, then cauterize with a lentil-shaped cautery subtly, and after the incision cauterize it worthily. 
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And often repair them, so that nothing remains of their roots; 
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.  
de la gresle	From gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come on papers of the eyes things that seem like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called “hail,” and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; 
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such: 
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the hail moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; 
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make then the two sides wide, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers and cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of paper, do not grieve anything to the patient;  
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the fissure is large, sew it with a suture and treat it until it is healed. 
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not exert any force, for ointments will soon restore it and bring flesh.  
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear toward the upper part, invert the paper and extend the hail with pincers, cut it and press from one side and the other; 
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter. 
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the hailstone is cut out, apply oil of salt water and heal the place with that which draws heat until the patient is healed. 
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease which is drawn into cloths of paper and it happens more to children than to adults, and it grieves much their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes. 
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this they lie on their faces then, and sleep on them, and have their papers beneath their eyebrows wet so that the swelling and appearance are covered with exinach which appears in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the exirnach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy place;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that it contains to be drawn from each part, then put it on top. 
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your hands on one side and the other so that the discharge is gathered within the circle. 
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit about as wide and no larger than the wound made when opening a vein. 
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And make the skin whole until you reach the discharge. 
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in several arrangements, the discharge comes from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.  
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Therefore extract it all at once with a piece of cloth pinched between your hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And be careful that you do not add anything into the fissure, unless you reach the whole septum as far as the eye, lest you bruise it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then slightly widen the fissure until it appears. 
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind with bandages. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind flaxseed and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then let the cure of softening poultices be applied until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow from grafted skin that are not natural and are old, they harm the eyes, and bring about various illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the skin and albuginea, as long as it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And the treatment is according to four methods: 
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before it, or a chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and suture, or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your breast, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand; 
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, it is good; 
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, if you put a needle through all of it above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let this be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow at these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; 
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, across the whole span, from the large tear duct to the small; 
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then draw on the paper a shape like an myrtle leaf, and in any case it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided into all.  
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if one needs to apply a large quantity of paper, according to how soft the paper is; 
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make across all the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin with large tears to small; 
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs, as thick as a radish root, then push the scalpel into one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all; 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then bring together the two lips with a stitch from a needle using very fine thread, wipe away the blood, and let the excess of threads dry on the two eyebrows with nothing sticky, if you see fit to do so; 
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and threads until three or four days; 
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then heal the wound without stitching with drying and constricting things, for paper will revive at the closure of the wound and its joining, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients say), and this work is without fear. 
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there is another way: 
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you sign the paper in a shape like the leaf of myrtle as we have told, at III ounces dried according to the form that is here:  
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then he who has small strength should apply it equally according to the form which is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread and put it in the shape; 
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put one other thread under the large tear, and the second thread under the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally; 
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally and lift all the skin on which you have signed as we have told, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching and heal it until it is healed;  
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments. 
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And it sometimes happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: 
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If you must use what we have said about incision; 
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But the suture in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of boils is according to this form:  
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And convert the paper and place it within according to what I have said, then make two boils by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and as wide as a spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And take two ends of two parts where you hold the threads; 
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then join one and the other subtly above what rises from the oil of the paper, and draw the two boils from the two parts formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And leave it like this for several days
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If he delays, so that the wound has some strength, then heal it until it is healthy; 
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound heals and if the paper is lifted and they no longer prick the hairs; 
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:  
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you take a fine needle and put in a very fine silk thread; 
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the ends and knot them subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; 
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order in the chase another fine silk thread tightly and knot the two ends of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head on a healthy surface; 
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let it be under the sun so that the work is illuminated, because it is a subtle and delicate work, then put the needle all the way into the root of the hair hastily, and make it pierce through the paper quickly as you draw it over the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the flesh, and put that hair into the flesh, if there is one or two or three or more. 
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull out your hand so that the hairs come out at all the flesh in the paper with the natural hair.  
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the flesh is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the flesh below all the thread that you have ordered there, until the flesh comes out through the holes above it, and you see it by the sight of the eye. 
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you will treat the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh grows up.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, then accompany one long horsehair with the natural ones, and let it grow together with the one you leave it with until it is lengthened and then remove it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the putrefaction of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness which is called "aleacratio" or gangrene comes to the eye, it can happen in two ways: 
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by cutting of a wound, or a cut or a cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to treat it is that you split that suture and separate the lips of it and put linen tents inside and bind it until it is healed; 
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not right that you use things in its treatment that dry and constrict.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first; 
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; 
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and rose water or elderflower and flax seed are cooked, and ointments of diascordium melted in any oil, and he envelops a tent and cures it this way.  
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal according to the shape it was before. 
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And this work that we have said is nothing other than directions for this illness, so that it does not return to the shape it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness which is below, which is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; 
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work is this: you take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left tear duct to the right so that the thread comes out in two sides of the flesh; 
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then you spread the flesh above the needle and sew it with a spatula half a span wide.  
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good; 
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits on either side of the inside of the paper. 
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	Let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has no "Greek I"; 
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the amount its sides are thick underneath, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool; 
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the care that we have said of softening remedies, and bandages, until it is healed.  
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a slit or seam or cautery, it is fitting that you make a full slit below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before; 
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; 
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare themselves with all their power to make the figure return to its natural form; 
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are needed, must be in several positions.  
dou soudement de la papiere	with the help of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of an egg, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; 
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and hold it with forceps, as long as you cut what is exposed with a very fine spatula, which is not too sharp or too dull, so that the patient does not suffer because the spatula is too sharp and does not burn the oil; 
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And let your incision, which you scrape away from the assembly, be light so that the paper comes back according to its natural form. 
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And it heals all the assembly, and make no more in the sharp eye salty, and lift it from sharp sweetness, and of colic. 
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put wool soaked in plenty of egg on the oil. 
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after the third day, use warm colic and things southward until it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners: 
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and seeming like hard fat, and another which is not nervous, but is seeming like white frozen moisture, that when you touch it with iron and think to pinch it, it cannot. 
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and the other such beginning towards the large tear duct, and grows bit by bit until it covers the whole eye and all the light and the movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is such that the patient puts his head on a sound surface, then opens his eyes; 
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper with your hand, then place the needle at the tips of the small forceps, and extend it above; 
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put in horsehair or cowhair or oxhair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a bit and put it in the needle, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the needle to a thread and extend it above, and flay all the hair on the side of the needle which touches the eyelid and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the rest at the root of the tear duct all along the delicate spatula and with small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tear duct, so that by the incision the body's accustomed tears do not come;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and at no time have the nails been put to the oncicle alone, as we said. 
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then we flay the whole spatula bone so that it is shaped like this: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the little plum is not pierced; 
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, put a piece of silk thread into the eye, and a collar made of silver, and leave it until the next day; 
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as needed until it is healed.  
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the oncicle cannot enter, this type of nail is often cured with medicine; 
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and it grows as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula with a small sharp point according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And place the ungent on top subtly, and if you see that it diminishes nothing and the reason hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead, and only grind it, and stop the eye until the next day; 
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing stands in your way, such as a boil in the eye, then milk it and first treat the hot boil until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear ducts harms the eye greatly, then suspend it to a thread, and in a cup cover part and not all, so that a stream of tears does not come; 
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge. 
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men, flesh-colored warts never arise, and cover the plum kernel and bind it on papers and turn it over the fire, and it resembles a rose of baluster; 
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the work is such that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you perform the operation on him, and keep all those parts clean with suitable bandages, and support it with strength. 
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then shave the first part, and go shaving all the way to the end with a razor, and be careful not to injure the eye during the operation. 
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And make the incision with a spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail, and use small force so that you remove the splinter, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.  
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress that has been boiled or distilled with red copper and similar corrosive medicines, and put hot cotton soaked in oil on top, so it is secure from a hot abscess.  
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains there and the foot swells up, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess; 
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work while it is healing, and do the same as many times as the object is inserted into the eye in this manner. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless, it is fitting that you relieve the treatment of each weak eye from its natural path;  
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental path in ironwork; 
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from the work.  
des voines des eulz	of veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Beneath are red veins which are covered upon the eye, and they tolerate at sight their work and weaken the eye all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, it is necessary first to look at whether the eye is strong or weak and there is no other illness except pain; 
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then proceed in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in good health, then suspend those veins at all ounce according to his wisdom, and let the ounces be subtle double according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be placed in two rows upon the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then one coils as strongly those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins outside of the eye; 
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and guard that you do not prick the eye at the points of the spatulas, and make this work at noon hour in front of the sun, and be very ardent in your work so that you only cut those veins; 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, if you distill in the eye colire green and red to corrupt that which has remained within the eye. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have power to pluck all that in that hour, if you make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of it, and leave some days until the pain is soothed and you are sure of hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; 
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the shape of the strengths: 
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The one named "fistula" is made.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it by cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess where it should remain and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.  
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed and you see decay and blackness, then cut it with all the instruments in this shape. 
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called "sharp chief" and is made of strong iron at the head front, and is pointed like a file as it is in this present shape. 
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand a bit until you know that corruption is gone.  
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines. 
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound is soldered and flesh grows, and the body of the bowel is soldered and remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen nor become abscessed, and no ill accidents occur, know that it is healed. 
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this is not the case, if there is nothing else to do but bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: 
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And that you uncover the bone the second time with an iron instrument and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a borer according to this form, and let the head of the borer have three angles, and the drill bit be sharpened down to the point as you see here: 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then put it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye by one finger's breadth, then turn the borer completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the vein in this place will swell if they hold their hand over their nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the place, it goes to the snow; 
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	From the outflow of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye opens completely and there is no disturbance in the nose, or diminishment, then you must bind the patient; 
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the sound, then apply cupping glasses or a hot iron to draw out pus, then put on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths;  
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain it with a hard bandage, and start the cupping glasses to suck without cutting. 
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then you must strain it more. 
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the oil come back together, it is good. 
se ce non;	If not;  
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Start the plaster and bandages and bandage and cupping glasses again until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	For the tearing of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When ruptures come in the canvas weave, then open it and take out thin sheets like grains of resin, and they are wonderful to see.  
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then thrust another needle where it has a doubled thread from the tear.  
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to its position; 
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then grasp the place of the double thread and tie one part of the eye around it, and pull it tight, then remove the needle and put a softened linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white; 
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the threads adhere with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; 
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and once the wound is held by the eye on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye shows great swelling, pierce it with a delicate scalpel that comes out perfectly from the eye, and drain the albuminous moisture and reduce the swelling, and it will subside soon; 
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed. 
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bowel of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than bowel which is gathered in the eye, resembling descending aqueduct, and it is not aqueduct; 
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it until you see the bowel coming up to your eyes. 
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and not descend, and let the light be unhindered, and have the patient look at things as he used to; 
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is aqueduct, and if the descent of the bowel is not as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and place it on the cornea with a prick by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the bowel rises; 
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is removed, if you distill in sharp hot oil mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	sharp points of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen similar things in the division, and what it takes to pierce; 
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and bind the good eye tightly; 
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper from the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; 
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right; 
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument behind the cornea at the thickness of a reed in the white part of the eye towards the part with the lesser tear duct. Then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and twist your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space; 
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda path be equal to the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black part; 
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the cornea of the eye; 
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone through this paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, then place the instrument up to where the point is, and then press it down one path after another.  
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the sharp point descends now, let the patient see it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	Afterwards rest a little, and if the point goes back up the second path, put force with the instrument, and when it is well embedded and it does not rise, then gently extract the almagda by turning your hand little by little; 
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then put again a sharp point of a gem stone, and lift from it the oil inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply a compress of oiled wool or linen soaked in rose oil and egg yolk, and bandage with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on common broth with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then you must take the instrument that is called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce then only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deeply, but make a subtle place, then put in almond paste, as we have said; 
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and for the completion of the work prepare the patient a doctor approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; 
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let it be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let it be bound according to its position until the third day; 
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day; 
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not fitting that you do this during the time of healing or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you delay it because the sharpness rises quickly.  
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When an abscess comes, untie the oil before the seventh day, and direct it by he who soothes abscesses. 
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is appeased, untie the view and put on its face a little gold to cover for any day, and let it be in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then leave from the house bit by bit, and turn into your cases.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that no disciples should interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country people made almond milk, which one sucks for sharpness, but nevertheless I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients. 
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing. 
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the resemblances of almond forms, for those who do not know them to see. 
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be of proper iron 
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh out of the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there are born or made various jointed charms, of which some appear to be scorpions with many feet. 
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there are such that it has a charm enchanted of fox color, and if a charm of good bone color.  
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of these charms which is of good bone and not enchanted, it befits that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. 
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	And open his nostrils, and give the charm to those nostrils, and draw forth 
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	for as long as you know that the charm is entirely drawn out.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that you cannot draw out, then work at it with all the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains. 
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without you surpassing it, or abscess grows, then cut it as it suits; 
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the pus is dried up and all the humors are removed, then pour or mix easily and sharply with wine. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the mixture works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; 
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is a humor embedded in the bone above, to which the instruments cannot come to cut; 
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is necessary that you put in a thread of linen a bit thick, and knotted by hand with us, and have between each knot a space of one inch or less; 
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's shoulder with the thread in his nose so that it can pull it through the nose into the mouth; 
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many times do children thus make fools of themselves, and it is a light thing for him who wishes to do it. 
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as those who are at the loom.  
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the new ones have corrupted this flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back at the beginning as before. 
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corrupted all that remains of the flesh. 
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then place at the beginning a cane of lead for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, then use them. 
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, into which one distills oils and medicines or such. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and the same applies to its conduit. 
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make it a closed cane, and let the instrument be full for purging the head;  
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it has a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid. 
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh out of the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often a disease called "telul" arises on the head and grows large, so much so that it is a frightening thing to behold. 
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of it, then apply a cautery or burning medicine to the spot. 
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is delayed in being cut until it is large, then be careful if it is hard, of dark color, and lacking sensation. 
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron, for it is an infected abscess, for when it is cut even once, great harm comes to the patient; 
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding agents. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding freely;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bring the two edges together in stitches, and then treat it until it is healed; 
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then bring the two edges together in stitches, and hold them firm, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense over them; 
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it dries out by itself, then cure it with anointing until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way to suture is that you bring together the solution: 
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	either with needles, as we have said in suturing the belly; 
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have shown you.  
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Sometimes hands appear within the lips of a hard abscess, resembling grains of millet, both smaller and larger; 
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn back the lips and split open each knot, and take them with forceps and cut them in every part; 
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the place after incision with powdered vitriol until the blood is cleansed;  
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then wash it with oil, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed. 
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there grows on the gums hot flesh, which the ancients called "albulus"; 
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run; 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put ground vitriol on the spot, or other binding and drying powders; 
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it; 
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the shapes of the instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; 
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth are black and citron-colored and wormy, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling; 
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your lap, and cut the flesh or the bones that appear, until nothing remains. 
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And then make black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are clean. 
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have cut everything. 
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth need various forms of instruments for cutting, according to what the work demonstrates, for the rasp which cuts out teeth has other shapes than those which cut between the teeth.  
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these shapes and others should be prepared with you. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay the extraction as much as you can, for it should not be done hastily. 
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for the razor 
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is fitting that you are certain of the teeth which are doing the treating.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks that it is from a toothache, and makes the good tooth bleed; 
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and nevertheless the pain does not go away because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have often wanted to do this to those healers; 
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is fitting that you scrape around the tooth at all its sides, strongly in order to keep the gum from all sides; 
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your two hands or use delicate pliers at the first touch and touch, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the pliers;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the jaw of the patient be in your holy hand between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert the end into each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the bone is pierced and gnawed, it is fitting that you fill it with cloths where the holes are. 
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And if you extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracted. 
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is very wise to work around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and returns to the patient by the evil of the root, greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not do as the ignorant barber-surgeons do, who by their haste and boldness break the jawbone sometimes, and do not bring about what we have related.  
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But they sometimes bring about great illness by the extraction because of the roots that remain or the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen. 
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or ale and salt.  
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if a flow of blood comes, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place. 
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that does not work, then cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments with which one must first pull out teeth should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you are pulling the tooth.  
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the shapes: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they shall be of large members so that they do not bend at all against, and shall be made of well-forged iron, and shall have teeth to hold the pieces.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put moistened cotton soaked in butter on the place for one or two days until the gums are softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," whose head resembles a bird's beak. 
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And they should be made inside like a file and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And it must be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the following forms come: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are placed in front of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments are dense;  
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted; 
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and clever master surgeons find their own instrument according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of others, so that it does not break the chariot or other bones, or rot if he seeks the instruments that suit it, as I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, from which is its form:  
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-gripping to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it; 
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place with suitable medicines, and if it has decay in the bone, and it is small, so do all this with instruments. 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When a tooth does not appear according to nature and the form is ugly, even in young women, you should know if the density is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place, and it cannot be filed or smoothed. 
adonques lou raie;	Then the ray. 
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has this shape and resembles a small beak, and is made of sharp iron. 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the chisel little by little in your hand for several days for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then the file with a part files as follows is its form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is like the file with which one makes needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And file the tooth little by little in your hands lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks off.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the plane at the end should have no razor sharpness, and if it is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the sharpness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt speech. 
quant li dent lochent	When a tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When a tooth in front falls out, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot bite on what he eats without pain, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and that does not work; 
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, for silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes. 
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see that you need to straighten the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the crooked teeth, if there is one or several, until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; 
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then begin again the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand delicately and wisely, so that it does not move. 
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your bandage be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then grasp the head with forceps and bring them together, and place it between the sound tooth, and set it so that it does not bruise the tongue.  
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it thus tightly as long as it can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, bind it with another thread. 
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains and serves thus for its entire duration, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two sound teeth and the two missing ones, as you see.  
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the head of the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, again and again, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and at no time is the shape of a cow's bone tooth made, and it is put in the place where the defect is, and it is extracted as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the bond of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	At no time does this ligament which comes below the tongue or by nature, come to be so.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	Or by accident of a stitched wound; 
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	And the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, and hold his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; 
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then grasp the nervous ligament broadly, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is due to stitching of a wound, then he puts in the hook and grasps broadly that ligament;  
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is beneath; 
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done so, lift the place with sharp rose and water, or with sharp cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; 
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient chew each night so that the gums cannot adhere.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood flow comes, put powdered vitriol on the place; 
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if it continues to bleed, cauterize it with a lentil cautery, which is good for this.  
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then cure it with other cures until it is healed, 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it of a dark color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; 
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is leaning toward the blind spot, and there is moisture, if it drips, one cuts the corner of a delicate spatula and frees it on one side and the other. 
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if your effort does not succeed in your work, put crushed vitriol on it until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw out all the pus. 
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the place with ease and silk, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godaths," and they are properly called the two almonds; and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: 
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is a hard abscess of small sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron at all.  
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron at all, so as not to cause bloodletting. 
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it alone until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it will break on its own. 
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is white and the root is thin, have your instrument ready to cut, but first see if the abscess is warm, relaxed and soothed. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let their head be in your hand, and open their mouth and take the instrument between your hands, and press down on the tongue with it.  
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And let it be of silver or thin steel like a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	As you press the tongue down with this instrument and see the abscess, take a lancet and put it into the almond (tonsil) and pull hard on it as much as you can. 
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not handle anything from the cloths with it, then apply the cautery instrument, of which this is the form, that it seems one force; 
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all its edges are curved, and one edge against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel. 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, take pliers as they are of this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it should be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other.  
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have applied one of the almonds, then apply the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, sharp water and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with hot water, or decoctions of cooked pomegranate seeds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stemmed. 
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then let it heal until it is sound.  
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so treat them like the two almonds. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely an abscess of small size. 
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it had almost completely closed off the whole throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in that state for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that he had to put two reins through the two holes of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened immediately, and put a poultice in it, then I drew out the pus freely and drew out a large portion of pus. 
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I did another poultice in the other opening where it was born, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue.  
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	Afterwards I put poultices on these abscesses, and squeezed out some of it, and only a little blood came out. 
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus was the conduit of her throat unstopped, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut from that abscess for a long time; 
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess would grow again, and fill the place which I had emptied, until it became very large; 
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I lanced it and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	thus it ceased to grow; 
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I departed from these parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the cold descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; 
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is below large and round, it is called "eye". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the sore abscess is quieted, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; 
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one which is round assembled and is not long; 
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is of blood color or brown color or black, then you must avoid its incision. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the sick person.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; 
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it downwards, and hold it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut away more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural boundary; 
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut away more, it will greatly grieve the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and dress it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of the cautery, it is fitting that you apply something to numb the fear during cauterization.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient put his head in clean water, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and seize it with sharp, lively tongs, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; 
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And apply the point of this instrument, which has this form:  
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And it has on its head a hair or where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine above the eye; 
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient lie on his side so that his saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat, and cause harm. 
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it soften and the stinging of the medicine is appeased; 
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in medicine, and push the instrument all the way into the cotton along its length until the cotton ignites on the edge. 
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry and apply it after four or five days.  
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so again and after the cautery wipe it around the edge with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine. 
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be treated with cold water, and be healed with gargles until it is cured.  
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery. 
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is cured with fumigation according to this method, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and add water, and boil.  
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and let the pot have the instrument stuck in it according to this manner: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or steel, and let one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, as long as the eye is mortified; 
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	then repeat often, until the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of a hot abscess, for many things happen; 
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do this except when the hot abscess is declining. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the head a bit of egg white, so that the mouth of the sick person is not too hot; 
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the egg white does not make the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.  
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else, gets stuck in the throat. 
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you see the thing move. 
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what you do not see and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach. 
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Perhaps the thing will come out by vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of stale bread. 
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it arrives at its place, it will come loose, and then you will draw it out forcefully. 
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come easily from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upward; 
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it cause his death, nor push any bone inside; 
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument in, so that he knows where the thing is located; 
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if it goes down, or if he pulls it out forcefully and evenly with all the instrument until it comes loose. 
de la sansue de la gorge	from the vein of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes medicine alone is enough for a remedy, as I have said in the division on the treatment of remedies; 
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument that I have described for you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, if it is grasped by all its small hooks, or with delicate tongs that are suited for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a dog's cane and put it in the patient's throat, then push or shove the end of the cane with a hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And keep the patient warm every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full vial of cold water, and work the mouth open, and put it in your mouth all at once, and move it around in your hand often; 
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the bone feels the cold, it will fall back into place. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall back into place as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; 
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall back into place without delay. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and it be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and the head of the instrument be put through that hole;  
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you put in your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the bone.  
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And the wound will now heal, and if it does not close, begin fumigation many times. 
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty things and such, and does not drink water. 
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then it will be necessary that she be healed by this treatment. 
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it can be seen, resembles curved tongs to enter the throat. 
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it has the appearance of a beak of a sewing needle, and it has the roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go. 
et vez ci la forme:	And see this shape:  
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many types of abscesses are, according to what memory comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size.  
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways one of which is in its own likeness, and of that which it holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the boils when they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses in fleshy areas are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the belly is healed according to its fulfillment;  
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if to such as it befits to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses which are near joints.  
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they are ripe around it, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is healed, it will harm the principal limb;  
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or where it is near the foundation, if one pierces it even when it is healed; 
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it does not behoove that you pierce an abscess ripe without complete digestion, except that which is near the foundation, lest it rot through and through, and be lengthened within, and a fistula arises;   
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal greatly. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess which is dangerous according to its completion, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and from the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; 
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must make the perforation where the most dependent part of the abscess is, and where it appears to move;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or at joints and nerves and arteries, it should be made in all their equals where there is no danger of a tear. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to the position of that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is best that you leave the opening until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this time, the poison will spread along the body, and it will be filled with a lot of filth; 
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps the lips and the depth of it harden. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that needs to be pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limbs require.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is fitting that you administer small abscesses, small perforations; 
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is fitting to cut out the core, and cover; 
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as yellow as drapery, and is mortified, then it is fitting to do as one does with boils: 
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such of which one cuts as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of angers; 
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, it is fitting that you pierce it completely; 
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the abscess is large and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out a part; 
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then repack the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing further. 
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times one after the other, until all the pus has come out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Likewise if the patient is weak in constitution, or a woman bearing child, or small children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the entrails often leap with the expulsion of the bowels, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not to blame.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you wipe the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; 
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a clean cut, apply bandages of linen or fine cotton. 
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess with many openings, it is necessary that you place a bandage in each one so that they come together. 
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have covered a part of the skin in the abscess and have sewn it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day. 
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone should be set and treated with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water that is sharp and clear, moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding site many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the discharge of blood persists, apply dressing and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is the time of winter, and the wound or abscess is very sensitive, then you must place bandages and cloths softened in wine and hot oil. 
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the flesh is strong, then you should put damp cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; 
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then open the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as is necessary until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is something that must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses: 
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter. 
des soros	of the shoulders
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When boils come on the head, they are like little knots that are in rags, just as the seam of a chemise, and many look alike.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and others that have moisture as well as pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are those that are hard and stony at the edges, there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is such that you must test all instruments which are called “entromissoire”, from which the form comes after this, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, let him pass a long cloth over it.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, do not leave any skin containing that moisture exposed, for it will return if you leave anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; 
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; 
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and do this for what remains overnight. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds a thick pus, then cut it according to this form for a long time;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and drain your lancets, and flay it from all sides, and apply all your treatment to draw out the pus where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterward. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for an abscess if it is pierced, and from the waist and from the healer as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the abscess pierces and moistens, it is lighter, because they are drops of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and of those was one I lanced on the head of an old woman; 
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; 
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had struck it, they would have done as much harm as striking a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	For other boils that come on the head, such as those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the lowest place, so that the pus can flow out; 
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment should be done accordingly.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the neck and below the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes it comes in other parts of the body, and they are many and interconnected with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And every scrofula is properly within its own rib, just as the wart and the boil on the head, as we have said; 
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the resemblances of these scrofula are many 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some which contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones which do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one then which you see of good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves from every part and is not near the nerves of the neck or the artery or the vein, and is not deep; 
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	it is fitting that you cut it above, and flay it from every part, and extend the two edges of the sore to one-quarter inch, if you need, as we have said in abscesses of the head; 
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel neither be blunt nor too sharp, so that the hands do not slip, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and remove the wound;  
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is calmed and the wound softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood has been drained off, return to your work until you have completed it. 
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then let your thumb indicate if there are any small scrofulas, and cut and clean them.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not right to cut that scrofula at its root. Rather tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall away by itself without harm. 
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them up now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary for you to understand how to cut the root of it, and draw force, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce them where they appear dead;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then administer tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. 
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment promoting flesh, until it heals. 
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; 
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have a squint, it is fitting that the fissure in the throat called the "epiglottis" be scraped;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and this should not be done for them, because all the veins and the pores of the patient are closed to those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the almonds. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the throat, it is necessary to lift the epiglottis to prevent death from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore fitting, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the amount of the incision in the soft palate, not in the cartilage;  
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage and the vessels are long to inquire. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he extends the skin of the throat to all its extent, then splits the flesh as far as it reaches the channel. 
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the syfac as we have said; 
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that flows out through the place that is broken, and by the absence of the voice. 
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open a while.  
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the flesh and sew it all alone without the cartilage. 
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it is healed. 
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely torn open, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with the windpipe.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death. 
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to sew the wound and clean it, until it was clean. 
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the lung. 
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood which had issued from it, and although it had not yet pierced a vein nor gone further than the throat, the veins were weak through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed the wound, and I cleaned it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And it happened to the maiden that she became hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her usual state. 
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called “hernia of the throat,” and is a large abscess in the color of jaundice, and occurs mostly in women. 
et est selonc II manieres:	And it occurs in two ways:  
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Where the natural has no cause. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two ways, of which one is similar to fat boils, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us of the artery. 
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there should be fear, and it is not fitting to work with fire except on that which is small, and test and examine at every opening: 
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as soft as our butter and cannot flow through any vein, cut off the top as we cut noses and treat all its hairs if there are any. 
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and bandage it well from the start, and heal it as is appropriate until it is perfectly healed. 
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways are known to us of which I will say all the resemblances; 
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I state all the differences that exist between a vein and an artery.  
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that an artery is hot and feverish as long as the boiling is not past and the decay is completed. 
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and heat subside.  
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	A vein has neither heat nor fever nor pain and contains its own juice which is its proper sac and is according to the color of the body, and it begins as a small stream and grows larger. 
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two appearances, either greasy or moist, and many of their colors are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a wound, that you probe and inquire first of all with any instrument called an "introducer," according to its shape or chapter which follows afterward.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiry into abscesses of us is that you take the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess. 
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the trocar, and take care in this that it does not go further. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moist matter runs out, whatever color it may have, let the patient do as I have said for other abscesses;  
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the trocar no moisture comes out, know that it is greasy, so let the patient do in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and slightly scratch it on each side, and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it healthy with the new one. 
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, pull it out piece by piece so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the nose will return many times; 
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a piece remains and it does not bother him, apply the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, and extract the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed; 
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the nose is large, sew the two edges of the wound and treat it with what promotes flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pulsating vein opposes you or another hastens you and applies the place of crushed vitriol, and leaves it there for two or three days, until the wound festers, and relieves the boiling of blood; 
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cut what remains in the nose.  
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of instruments for insertion, and they are of three manners: 
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small; 
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three square ones which are called “albaret”, and one which is called “breb”, and there are three manners of them:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; 
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which we sew charms, and are made of citrine brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and are better tested by black lead for encircling the curves of fistula; 
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three manners: 
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the cannulae are of much similarity, as you see here: 
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if they are of three kinds with two curves;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if they are of three curves, and are also of three kinds; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if they are of two curves, and one curve only, and are of three kinds; 
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these with which one cuts are sharp, and there are some which do not cut more forcefully than from one side, from which one scrapes the flesh, for this reason one does not cut the vein nor the nerve; 
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these are the small hollow-handled instruments held in hand, so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses; 
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Great, small, and medium, as you see; 
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and joints, and similar places; 
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And never make another instrument small, resembling a pestle's head, according to this shape, with which one cauterizes blood: 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back in place which heals by joining of the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to corrupt, so much so that they resemble women's breasts; 
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain unsightly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them, if it is necessary, must do so according to the form of this line .b. up to .g.: 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; 
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs low, and is loosened by its size as it happens with women, then make two cuts in two ribs above, through two similar incisions. 
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; 
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then flay the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; 
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it fattens with marrow and grease, then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an ointment suitable for it until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then cut it as we have said for cutting scrofula, and if the wound goes inwards, then apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is severed and the skin above it is sewn together, there often come abscesses, and the same thing happens with a swollen vein and an abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the one who knows cuts it when it is for the artery, the abscesses are long and straight; 
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel it with your fingers, you feel separation;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, it appears round and fiery. 
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is folly to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles or on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is fitting to avoid treatment with iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and for the one who has swelling from an artery that passes beneath the skin along its length;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work the incision as if making a notch, and neatly separate the artery from the surrounding tissues, until it is exposed. 
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and remove the artery with a doubled thread in two parts, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples. 
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then prick the area between the two ligatures with an introcuter until all the blood that is there comes out, and the abscess is released.  
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply a dressing that promotes healing, as long as the ligatures hold. 
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is located near the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can grasp from the abscess along with the skin, then insert a needle beneath the area you are holding, and make it pierce through, and thread a doubled thread so that you pull it from the other side. 
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with thread from one of its two sides to the two bones. 
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will not come loose, put another needle through all the thread below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four places. 
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is tied. 
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a cloth softened in wine and oil on it, then give him treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, abscesses also come to nerves when they are strained, or from too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a festering sore, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several conditions without pain. 
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is extracted formed, if the patient feels pain, and is not entirely well in the body, but below the heart; 
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron: 
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	for fear it might cause contraction; 
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula.  
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and cover it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with an awl and scarify it, then the surgeon assembles the wound with sutures, and heals it until it is healthy. 
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called “fungus” because of its resemblance to ashes, and the root is subtle, and the head large; 
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are small ones and very large ones; 
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had small roots, and were easily split open, and moisture ran from them immediately. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces, and in operations when cutting if you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and has fine roots;  
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the cut is made with a scalpel, and there are cauteries ready. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at the waist there often comes excessive blood flow, and if it does not stop, hurry then and cauterize. 
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient faint and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of silk, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;  
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then hold it tightly, and do not cease to pull the thread of flax until it catches the bone, and moves through it. 
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, there is fear of catching them immediately for the abdomen, but you can well catch half, then cauterize it so it does not grow back; 
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and be careful not to catch the tendon which is of a reddish color and poor sense and milky appearance. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the arm is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a split in the flesh, and is on the belly and among some bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before it, or from windiness.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is from a rupture of the flesh and by the flow from the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various outlets. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed at its hips if it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance if it is tightened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strenuous effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but do not force it. 
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.  
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of an artery or vein, or windiness.  
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the cure continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowels, then it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be extended straight, then press all around the arm. 
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command him to grasp firmly between your hands, then go around the place that you have pressed with all of the spatulum, then extend half of the abscess above at all the great one. 
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the knot be secure. 
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on half of the abscess stretched out over the ligature, and insert your index finger, and press the intestines. 
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the ligature, loosen it, and push the intestine out behind the belly.  
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the pus, take it with forceps and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein opposes you, wind carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, insert them with strong thread, and push the two needles around what you have already done, in a cross shape so that you pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then draw the abscess in four directions along the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles and leave the wound open until it dries, and let the dead flesh come out on its own. 
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then cure what is needed, and empty the abscess as we have said; 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and stitch the place. 
dou chancre	Where a sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the resemblances of a sore, and how one should work by medicine, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron; 
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say that a sore spreads in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and they said the ancients that when sores are in places where one can shave them off like a sore which is on the breasts, and on the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it all when it is at the beginning; 
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you should not approach it at all, for I have never been able to cure any. 
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one ever heals before me. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the operations, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient of black bile several times. 
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to perform the operation; 
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then shave your instruments or lancets, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything; 
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and cleanse the place well with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding makes you oppose the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped. 
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with another cure until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron: 
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only broken; 
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch it with iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and iposarche, for they are deadly things. 
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy which is called “broken” and the treatment does not work, see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	Do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt; 
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient is of strong constitution and they have only dropsy, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: 
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lay the patient straight on your hands, and have the assistant press on the belly from below, at the lowest part of the bladder. Then take the sharp-pointed spatula in this way: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to the point, and however it is not so deep that it can reach the intestine when put in, and cannot be bleached. 
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines:  
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you split in its lower part three finger widths straight down above the hipbone; 
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the abdomen three finger widths.  
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is for the spleen, it should be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lies on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to the weak area. 
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it in, and lift your hand to all the spatulas between the skin and the fascia as much as when scraping off the quantity of a fingernail or so.  
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the syfac until the spatula reaches the eighth place, and that is the place of the sharp point, then hold it firm, and push this instrument, which has the following shape: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a slender silver cane, and is made of horn or light wood, and has a small hole at the bottom. 
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	And on one side are three holes.  
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And two on the other side, and one on another. 
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the point is cut like a quill, and that is the shape of the incision with which scribes cut the quill: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top is the handle so that when the instrument comes to the point, it now descends onto the instrument. 
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty it then halfway or a third, because if you empty more than is necessary at that time, the patient may die due to the release of his spirit from the body, or he will fall into a stupor, or approach death. 
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the void quantity of its virtue, and according to what the patient's disposition signifies, and their pulse; 
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held for the heart which pierces the pertussis that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; 
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then start the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat a small amount of the point; 
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and be careful not to press while it remains but a prick of a point.  
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and leave much of a point, let the cure be hot sand or a warm bath and sweat, and sunbathing, and have them drink plenty; 
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the severing of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a hole in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary as soon as possible, so that it does not pierce all the marrow very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or make a small plug of lead, and tie it and leave it like this for three days or four and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and urinate, and then put it back; 
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance none is needed, for the strong urine which comes will not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose openings are small, if they are treated with a clove of garlic, as we have said, it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the passage in their place are wretched, for none are born who have a passage at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; 
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come up to the urethra, and this is a bad illness. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then they extend the head of the penis and the foreskin as the size of a quill, so that the hole pierces in the middle, as it should be; 
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware of the flow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, use a styptic to stop the bleeding, and dress the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these pustules come on the penis, and they are an unsightly appearance of flesh; 
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and benign ones; 
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is necessary that you take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and clean them all, then put softened cotton with Egyptian ointment on top; 
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress it with diachylon ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of a foul color and discharging, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have caught it, and if the albathed is at the top of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the albathed which is inside first. 
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is soldered, so the cure is outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it together, if the head of the penis is not well secured so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption comes in its penis and groin; 
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	it is necessary to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then bind it with a plaster of honey and flour which is made of pomegranate rind and vinegar, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, then apply the crescent cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Cauteries help in two ways together: 
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, in the stopping of blood, and in corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is fitting that you apply or insert into the penis a cane of lead, and have the patient urinate through it.  
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hairs grow around the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is fitting that you burn it off with a heated instrument, so that the bonds are loosened and the head of the penis is freed on all sides. 
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a difficult thing to do, it is fitting that you burn it off with a spatula at some point on the head of the penis and on the skin. 
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then carefully separate them between, and apply a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not burn again. 
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a loosening of continuity like the other wounds; 
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, when we perform this work of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for salvation. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want most masters and surgeons who performed circumcision to do it in one go, with force, and with a single incision; 
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the heart failed because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts above and leaves the one below. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Here it is necessary to cut again, and there is double pain, and for healing which is in two layers, the tip of the member is not well secured. 
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And for the healing of one layer, perhaps the iron slips and spoils the work, and many times are born so they do not need healing and I want it this way. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleansing which is done with all the force of the thread I have found the benefit of experience for the force cuts precisely as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in a straight line. 
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But let the threads be well twisted around the leather;  
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only doing it to tie the thread around the penis, and then you can reassure them in all the ways you can. 
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then let it come out between your hands straight, and hold the force between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments. 
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand on the penis and blow or breathe on it, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in. 
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, then tie it below the penis at the other tie. 
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with your second finger to the pouch and the index finger, and grasp between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly from above and treat the head of the penis. 
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is the best. 
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on top and on top of the powder I drape it with a half of a cooked egg tempered with rose water, confit with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure as long as it is healed.  
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces in the world is this: 
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two cheeks should be held and sharp, and the cheeks should also be as large as the handle equally.  
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of the world is when the hearts inside flee at the incision. 
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, just as pus forms an abscess; 
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And the cap similarly, and if you cannot hold it at your finger, then take tongs and hold the cap. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they exceed three days, and that which is beneath the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until the abscess under the foreskin is calmed, and lightly scrape it. 
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If the cap can be moved as you are able, and take care of the part of the foreskin, for it will do no harm.  
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Then cure the place of things within the wound with powder as we have said in our treatise on powders, and if the cap is too tight and goes up, it will do no harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cure it, as we have said, until it is healed. 
dou retenement de l’urine	Concerning the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine can be due to stones, or congealed blood, or a bowel obstruction, or a dead fetus, or similar things, as we have said in the division. 
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone at the neck of the bladder, then it is appropriate for the patient to be bent over on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And his feet should be placed on his back and he should stretch out his belly above his back, and restrain the patient from moving as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted to force out the stone above so that the urine can be released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient is in great pain, then you must administer an extraction using an instrument called a “syringe,” which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it should be of finely wrought silver, light as a bird's feather. 
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And the handle should be a palm and a half long, and fine at the top. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of removing urine is this: you take a doubled thread and tie a piece of wool or cotton to the top, and insert the top of the thread into the syringe;  
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the top of the syringe. Then grease the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and have the patient sit on a seat, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;  
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the buttocks; 
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then insert the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder and feel the patient's urine flow into the empty vessel and this is not done according to this order unless the guide where it goes is crooked. 
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then extend the thread to all the wool bit by bit and the urine follows the wool then extract it and make the urine flow. 
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And start the syringe again until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.  
des maladies de la vessie	of the illnesses of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorches or blood comes to the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then do it with all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed and if it has three openings: 
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side and one on the other as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the leaves should be cut so that the medicine shortens it well without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and insert it when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicines going into the bladder put the head of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out with what is inside. 
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you treat the moisture at the joint, and then firmly bind the limb; 
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	The moisture will enter the limb, and will come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it; 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of a subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:  
si est ci:	This is it: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or pewter, and the head is higher;  
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And below at its side where the linen string is attached; 
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture which you saw used to enema the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good strong string doubled over, and heat the whole thing on the fire;  
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then insert the head of the enema into the urethra, and hold your hand on the bladder to keep all the moisture flowing until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived in the bladder; 
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about. 
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then thread a strong cord through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a ball, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument. 
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the division the manners of stone, and its extraction together with medicines. 
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the reins and all its signs, and in what kind of stone one should operate with a cut. 
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp point of the stone resembles the point of a needle in its subtlety. 
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And it opens wide and grates on the patient's penis, and penetrates it many times, and then it twists. 
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And many of these points are dissolved;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And healing is easy for children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in older people, and is in the middle for those who are between youth and old age. 
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, to draw out all the slime that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and push them down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it comes out sometimes from the top. 
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands evenly balanced, and let his hands be under his thighs so that his bladder is entirely inclined downwards. 
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then grasp it and touch it inside. 
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut upon the stone.  
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not move at all when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger if the patient is a young man; 
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into his fundament and grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bind it at the neck of the bladder. 
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press upon your finger and insert it to where you see you must cut.  
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand and tell him to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and to remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where the incision will be made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he thrusts the spatulate instrument cutting, of which this is the form: 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And he makes an incision between what is between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; 
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it should be straight above the stone, and your two hands should be right there at the fundament, and let the waist be wide externally and narrow internally, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; 
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance, if the hand that is at the fundament presses so that it jumps out without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there are stones which have angles and margins: 
si est griés a issir;	if it is grated to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and there are some which are underneath, resembling a bean and round, of which the exit is easy. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore when there are angles and a margin, make the size greater. 
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not come out, it is fitting that you extract it with tongs which are also like a file at the head, in order to pull out the stone so that it does not escape. 
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	Or you insert below it a subtle instrument bent at the head; 
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you cannot introduce it thus, enlarge the hole a little, and if the stone is not softened, extract it with vitriol. 
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one stones, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then those on top, then force it through and the small ones afterwards if there are several.  
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must sew it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient: 
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	Either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because the veins cannot join together.  
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But nevertheless, strive to draw it out or break it apart with forceps, so that you draw it out piece by piece. 
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, apply to the wound frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, draw it out, and put on top a cloth softened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. 
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then put the patient back on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.  
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if it rises very well in a place of oil and water, then cure it with diachylon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained by this, which is known in part to flow without a jump along with the urine. 
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then put your finger in the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it.  
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound with a sharp point and a needle and thread, and help it in all the ways you know, until it is healed; 
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, you bind the two thighs together, and apply the medicines on the spot. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, and stuck there, and the urine cannot pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the cure that I have just mentioned is done, then you are excused from cutting many times because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron forceps according to this shape and let it have three angles fixed in the fire:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; 
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then insert the borer into the penis lightly, until it reaches the stone; 
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the borer in your hand on the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone through to the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is soon broken and jumps out with the urine, the patient is cured.  
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then cut the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound.  
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It can happen that a stone is lodged in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: 
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; 
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to reveal herself naked, especially when she is chaste. 
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is such that by chance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands; 
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more deeply set than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands it, it is fitting that you take a midwife well-knowing, and one rarely finds her, and if you do not find her, do not cast in a subtle mirror; 
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present a midwife well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry into the stone; 
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very well whether the woman is a virgin: 
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is fitting for her to put her finger or foundation and seek the stone; 
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she should constrain it below her finger, and recommend that she put her finger or the patient's hand, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it quickly from the entrance of the bladder to below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; 
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then she presses on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is most easily moved, and feels the stone in that part;  
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the size be at first small; 
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then put the knife in the size, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of stones: 
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have veins. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the resemblances to recognize the outcome
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the vein goes away, put powdered vitriol on it, and hold it for an hour until the vein is extinguished. 
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work while the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting the stone from men to help you in your work. 
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the vein goes away and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the area and bind it with bandages and cloths, and do not start again that day, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear the patient might die. 
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.  
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the pain subsides, you may return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramices aqueous is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white phlegm, which is below the heart of the testicles and contains sperm.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac," and never properly in the cloth of an egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; 
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin under the white syfac that we have said; 
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this did not occur to us.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and is spread throughout the matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never if it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: 
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	it is colored declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; 
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is white syfac as we have said, it is a boil on the testicles; the sore is long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the actual cloth, the abscess will return with a portion of the egg, and for this reason it is thought that it is another egg. 
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sinew, then one feels it well. 
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you see that you know the color of the moisture, then try all the instruments, of which the form is described above. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this which comes after the introducer, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cauterize it with iron, it is fitting that the patient be purged according to our power and the fullness of his body. 
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then place him on his back, on something a bit high, and put many cloths under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the instrument to one of the two ribs near the testicles.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the scalpel sharp and cut the skin of the testicles among them along the length down to the knife's point and let your incision be perfectly straight in dividing the skin of the testicles until white flesh, and flay it subtly according to the poor man. 
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white flesh clear with a sharp large hole and extract all the pus, and then put your ointments and raise the white flesh up. 
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the white flesh.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut all or in parts immediately its side subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the pus will return. 
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the testicle jumps out during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the white flesh.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two lips of the heart of the testicles with a suture, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find that the egg is corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspensory, doubting the flow of blood. 
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the colon at all the suspensory points, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the sharp is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches.  
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil. 
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put it on the two cuts, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie them up according to this form. 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and fill them with shredded linen according to this appearance, and they are assembled by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one of the ends takes hold on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part by the handle. 
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and let all the restraint be assembled in the loop of the arm; 
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is this branch of the cautery medicated in place of an iron blade, but rather you take a delicate surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white fascia containing the nerve is exposed. 
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that fascia with it, and flay it with this delicate hot cautery: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in all the ways you can, until you have completely eradicated it.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and take care that the fire does not touch the testicle; 
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and easier to manage bleeding, and milder than the operations of incision. 
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess or discharge of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horribleness, then make a small perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the aqueous humor is there, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; 
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess at the bottom part across the whole width, and make the perforation as long as the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the opening be wide so that all the humor can flow out; 
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the spot and bind it, and let the remaining humor flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed; 
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not let the pus out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a feather in it or an instrument with which one treats the dropsy, of which the shape is mentioned before; 
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the sore, and know that the pus will return, and gather after six months or so; and when it is gathered as before, then the patient will spend his days. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this branch there are many positions out of fear, for which it seems to me better to leave it. 
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess.  
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come on the body, and likewise on the buttocks; 
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is by many instances.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by excess of sharp and bitter humor, which is spread to the joints, or from impact. 
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; 
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And there is no pain found, and it is a grievous abscess; 
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there are some abscesses that are gray, porous and pierced, and of a dark color, and sometimes it comes from a new artery or swelling of a vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a new artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. 
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not advisable that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made from swelling of a vein is known by its disposition upon the touch of the fingers and one can well make an incision upon this type and upon others. 
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then lift up the egg white, and draw it forth from the white sinew, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg white is already cooked with these new things, then it is fitting that you draw out the egg white, and cut it. 
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is attached to the sinew, or in those that are inside the vessels, then it is fitting that you deliver all of that membrane, and cut it roundly.  
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is behind or elsewhere, it is necessary that you cut all of it and extract the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in an envelope resembling a poppy seed pod, with the softening of onions, and the patient groans when he goes. 
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this illness is just as fearful as the one before, and nonetheless we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is fitting that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspensory from his testicles down to your thighs, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them tightly. 
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then take a sharp scalpel and cut through the vessels in a wide area until they are exposed, then flay from each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; 
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then he puts in a needle with a doubled thread and ties it to the first place where the vein came out, and ties it straight across to the other end; 
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then he cuts them in the middle straight according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heals the wound as the others where we inject a bowel so that no vessel bursts that nourishes one of the testicles;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this no harm comes and if all the vessels come into view then it is necessary to draw the veins at all the vessels 
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the bone does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels and they dry up and cannot be helped 
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the facial bone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrence of this branch is by the section which comes or arises on the belly in the part of the groin so that the intestines descend from this rupture to one of the veins 
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either at the groin or from the extension of it and these two manners come from many causes 
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	either from a blow, or a jump, or a struggle, or the lifting of something heavy and by similar things 
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the groin are that it happens little by little over a long time and does not come suddenly
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscess is equalized up to the fundament, so that the pus follows the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the fistula, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are various abscesses appearing underneath the skin nearby, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's defenses against the fistula.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the intestines with the entrails, and it is retained there, and causes great pain to be suffered by the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments due to fear, for which it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of working is such that you instruct the patient to massage the intestines with his hand inside the wound, if he can enter; 
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then it should be rubbed on its neck between your hands and loosen the thighs; 
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the heart above, and scrape all the skin of the buttocks along the length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the lips of the waist one-inch incisions according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the pus can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then flay the pus that is under the skin of the buttocks, so that the white pus hard is uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your index finger in what follows the buttock, in what is between the white pus that is under the skin of the thigh, and between the second pus, and detach what is behind the thigh, and between the second pus;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then place the left hand inside the testicles and extend the white cord upwards towards your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the white cord toward the waist; 
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and loosen what is behind the bandage; 
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask at your feet if there is any intestine wrapped around or hard white cord, and if you find none, push it into the belly below; 
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a large thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the cord, which is after the skin of the testicles; 
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the cord, which we said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong tie of two parts; 
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the head of the shoulder with threads, and tie it in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess arise. 
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place a second tie above the first one, twice as long as that, and after these two ties leave two fingers' breadth below the pit of the chest. 
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And afterward all the rest according to the roundness which an egg carries.  
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut into the part below the skin of the chest, as much as the sinews allow, and the gut, as we have said before. 
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wool moistened with oil to the wounds, and place it upon them, and then apply the tie that we have mentioned. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize white flesh as we have said, after the incision, for fear of stopping the flow of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and leave the tie until it oozes through.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in the chair, so be it raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it discharges; 
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made as the branch which is together with the vine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision on top lightly underneath; 
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with what works, until the vessels discharge;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.  
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture comes in the angles, as we have said, and opens the limbs; 
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and none of the intestines are drawn out as coils, and if any are drawn out, it is bad, and repair every hour; 
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And if it remains too long in this position, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestines protrude. 
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the fistula which is at an angle, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen, and opened. 
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before. 
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: 
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then mark the place of the rupture swollen for three fingers wide.  
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the fistula which is below the skin that has become accustomed to it, then take a thread and place it on the spot apparent of the fistula. 
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press at the depth of the belly, then sew the two apparent places of the fistula onto the head of the thread, and sew one and the other. 
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the right [bone], and do not cover the bone nor extend the bone or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the fracture of the intestines; 
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it by the treatment of wounds.  
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if the patient cleanses and heals the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syfac is constrained, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the vessels within are softened, and it is made to be seen; 
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that one make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin onto the natural skin;  
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring together the two lips at one suture, and if you see it, first sew the excess of the softened skin to three or four sutures firmly; 
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the sutures, and treat it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.  
dou chastrement	Through chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castrations are begun in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of them in this book; 
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and they are only necessary for two ways:  
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that the mire responds in kind when one asks it and in kind the cure; 
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: 
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by incision.  
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hang down; 
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand until they are drawn back and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the castration of the loins: 
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle one cut, when you have well skinned them; 
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	And leave no spot so that the facial skin and the subtle facial skin which is upon the vessels; 
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this manner of castration is better than that which is done by traction, for because in traction some part of the testicles may remain by chance, by which the beast desires lust; 
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners like men:  
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is when between the two testicles appears also like the shape of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes passes urine through it.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has upon the breast as a rod and two horns.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for man and woman is such that you cut away all the attached flesh, and treat it like other wounds. 
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, for men whose urine passes through the skin of their testicles, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	from the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tentigine is an attached flesh on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;  
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the treatment. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is fitting that you hold the excess of the tentigine in your hand or at a knife point and cut it lightly;  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, so that blood does not flow, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another flesh that grows at the mouth of the bladder, and it bleeds, and sometimes bursts, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this the ancients called it "cow disease." 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you treat it as we have said about the tentigine, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of a wandering [bone]
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the nature of a woman is not perceived, or when the openings are small; 
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that it has come;  
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by char added, or through subtle artifice or species, and it is made perfect in the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be;  
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they defer conception, and childbirth, and perhaps having flowers; 
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of these is by the regard of the belly.  
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the splinters are close together, appearing so at your right or left hand.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is through subtle artifice, and it is close to two pounds, if you hurry, then do this:  
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spread her legs; 
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then stretch the two pounds until the subtle artifice is gone, and the inflammations are over; 
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and moisten it with oil and put it on the place and let the woman rest at home every day so that she cannot lift. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the bone is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatulum resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the swelling is from fresh meat, suspend it to the loin and the hip; 
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines well-seasoned with blood, such as agaric, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with plenty of egg yolk. 
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a cane of plumb large enough so that the wound cannot close; 
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; 
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be cured with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a sore appears on the sea, if it should be covered according to this manner, unless it is an abscess or ulcer.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an infected abscess which is in the flesh one must not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually accustom themselves to, and when hemorrhoids are old they become swollen. 
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the division the resemblances of wounds, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and fistulas, when they are deeply embedded in the anus, and do not appear to the touch, unless they are cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel, are those one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then extract the tumor with forceps, and cut off the cap on its roots, then sprinkle powders of medicines that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things. 
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then plunge her feet into water for an hour, then put her in cold water.  
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood flow occurs, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it extinguishes, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without injuring.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take wool, and moisten it with plantain juice or with elderberry juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the place. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess subsides, care for the place with ointment until it is healed;  
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called “albathir” is red, and resembles the sharp edge of a knife, if it needs to be covered as I have said for the lultel. 
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then care for it until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the sea
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the flesh, such as ulcers and gangrenous abscesses and herpes and inflammations and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes on the marrow, which is not like the abscesses that swell. 
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you want to know the work of iron, look and see if the abscess is hot at the beginning of its appearance, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it rest until the pain is eased; 
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools where he can lean, and let him rest on his back and bring together his feet at the sides of the leg; 
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; 
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then suck the side towards the right side, and he will bring the instrument with which one works the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the shape;  
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being administered, you first insert the point to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters within the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; 
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not injure it. 
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and he must put the horn of the instrument on top and hold the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and it is made soft with the hand, if necessary, cover it at the head, apply the spatula.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowels are emptied, you must put softened tents in the wound, in rose oil or in dry verdigris oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tent firmly from the wound to the depth of the wound, and put above the wound and on the handle clean linen soaked in water or vinegar that has been cooked. 
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it after two days with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed. 
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and at no time lift it up but moisten the wound with an enema of vinegar and honey, then of vinegar or lily roots and long-cooked aristolochia. 
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is filled in the margin, it is necessary that you refrain from cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if she sees the woman hasten downwards, and desire to smell the air. 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child will hasten strongly to be born.  
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under its head, and the afterbirth with it.  
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is fitting to press her belly lightly so that the child is born quickly. 
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when it descends head first, the afterbirth comes with it and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing.  
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes strong against the body or the shoulder, and the hands, where it comes upon its belly, or often, and is converted by chance out of its neck, and by other evil figures; 
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes upon its head by natural passage, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then have her sit upon a stool, where women hold her; 
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and boil oil or fenugreek seed, and then put the midwife between her thighs a small spatula of which here is its form. 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And split the second fingernail, and cut it to its nail until the moisture which is inside comes out. 
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil. 
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her grip and sneeze continuously, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.  
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If it is now extracted. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out strong, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly, little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up high. 
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then overturn the stool onto the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when it is overturned.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if their hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then cut the infant's hands with the knife which is previously placed, and remove the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the delivery of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, if it bends forward, you must push it upwards; 
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is straight; 
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of its feet and extend them little by little. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up to its thighs, if ordered, then make it sneeze forcefully.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps further, God willing. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, so turn it little by little until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come further as we have said, take gum arabic, and oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind all together in a mortar; 
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the nature of the woman within and heat this ointment, then make her sit in hot water up to under the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened underneath, make him a collar of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; 
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and press her belly lightly, for the infant jumps now. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his chest little by little; 
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be swaddled up to his neck, and hang his feet down, and be lying on the bed; 
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then put his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from underneath, until she is fully revealed below; 
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not jump, take his feet and move them back and forth, then move the belly upwards, then he pushes with his hands;  
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and suckle the child little by little; 
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instruct the woman to take care of herself until the infant is weaned. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the delivery of a child who comes forth with one hand outstretched
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer a way to return the hand: 
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot return it, then have the woman stand up and walk;  
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her sit on the bed and straighten her legs out. 
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then apply the ointment that I have mentioned;  
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair and then study how to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and suckle the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to take care of herself until the infant is fully weaned.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child upon its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife holds her hand, then turns it little by little, and suckles it gently; 
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when they are equal, put on a plaster of honey and oil as we have said, then tell them to move it little by little 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and tell her to hold herself steady  
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner to all the second
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out hard in this manner at the second time, cut the second time to your fingernail until the moisture is emptied
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child can suck on its face and on its neck, cut it from there so it is not held back, and let the child die
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside as far as you have put it as it should be, and tell the woman to hold herself steady at all times 
adonques si istra legierement.	then draw lightly  
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes none are born III or IV; 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. 
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied and are weaned by the wolf who devours them, which is linked to the buttocks;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they also come forth naturally as one under all, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come forth grievously, so the cure as we have said, and be the balm subtle, and make quickly and lightly what it does; 
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it is worth moving to safety.
de plusors enfans	of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it befits that the balm know all this, for by chance similar things happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do according to what is right. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands. 
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any other condition or fear of death. 
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the practitioner must hold her firmly in two places, or tie her to the bed so that she is not moved during the removal of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oil mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek mucilage and flaxseed. Then anoint her belly with these oils and mixtures. 
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then put the end in lukewarm water, then wherever it bites apply ointments that are suitable for this, and be careful if it is inflamed so that it descends on its head; 
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If it puts the ointments in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or on the temple or near the ribs, and if its descent is on foot, put them on the ankle and lower ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he hold the ointment in his right hand, and put the curvature between his fingers of his left hand, and apply it to all his hand lightly, and put the ointment in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; 
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the ointment: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then put it against the other ointment, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they are stretched equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the canines be toothed to hold it, as it is in this form: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, anoint the base with some of its two oils, and put them in that part, and draw out the other part; 
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if none remains, put this canine or a higher place, and do this until it all comes out. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and he cannot bring it back due to tightness, it is fitting that you wrap it up on a cloth, until it all comes out; 
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cut into the joint of the sole or with a knife, and thus you must do it to the other hand, and to both feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if it has a sharp point assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your fingers, press the head and remove the point. 
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you turn it to the instrument which is called "almidach", from which its shape comes with the instruments or chapter that are after this one. 
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do the same if the child has a large head naturally. 
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is extracted by force, it should be split, as long as the moisture which is in the birth canal goes out. 
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can.  
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, the attraction is light, and straightening at the mouth of the uterus is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is embedded in the belly or breast, it behooves you to extract it wrapped in a cloth on the hand; 
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make the belly or breast, so long as the moisture that is there runs out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are removed and the head remains, put a ball of your hand upon the wound, and pull it to the mouth of the wound; 
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then put one or two pincers on it, and pull hard;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot boil that has come, it is not right to work on it, but rather administer moist and greasy things; 
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and plasters of mild softening and moistening properties.  
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, administer what we have said for a live infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is not enough strength, so the treatment goes in parts, and leave nothing of the second intention. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if you administer what we have said in abscesses which come to the marrow. 
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding comes, it should be put on tightly restricting, and administer other treatments. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a boil came to him on his arm, and it swelled so much that it opened, and he began to have great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, and could not stitch the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled greatly, for this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought these were bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I treated the wound, and handled bones with my hands, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I kept the woman for a long time like this, and it would be a little bit of bone at that place; 
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have only recorded this chapter so that when the masters find a foreign thing, they know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Bring back the marrow to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here follows the form of the pressor, with which we weigh the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns as the head of the two liens. 
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, let the horn be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood. 
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let the mouth be of a fist two fingers wide, and the edge of the trees one must, and in length a palm and a half.  
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two limbs there are two adjustments of this same fist, which are firm on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more. 
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.  
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs.  
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And it has two horns and two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide. 
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vulva open to the instrument, make the woman sit up on her bed with her feet hanging down and her legs open, then insert the two instruments joined together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs. 
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the pliers equally, according to the amount that you see the mouth of the vulva open, so that the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all assembled and multiplied in their likenesses.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the midwife has them ready, the work is faster and higher for their quantity.  
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold back her breath, and then make her sneeze on purpose, and remove your hands from her mouth and nose. 
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps through it, it is good 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, he takes a pot and makes a hole or cover, and puts in herbs that can open the mouth of the sore, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; 
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then he puts a cane or tube into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the sore, and lets it stay until the vapors go inside the sore
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then he makes her sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second sinew leaps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and is not soft, he orders the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then puts it into the sore, and squeezes the second finger. 
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, if she takes it and extends it little by little straight so that the marrow does not break at the extraction; 
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull;  
si venra et se desaerdra.	it will come out and become disentangled. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is narrow, we have said the cure is to sneeze and to smoke herbs; 
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful not to pull in the opposite direction; 
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema of tetrapharmacon ointment. 
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she will purge and put it back, and it will come out strong; 
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But nevertheless, when it ferments, a foul odor arises in the stomach and head, and harms the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore suitable fumigations are necessary for this: 
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have tried fumigation of cress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman for the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears similar to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the fire, and the wide heads on the fire; 
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigation be over the coals, until the rash is gone, and begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have a pierced fundament, but rather it is closed by a subtle membrane:  
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore the midwife must pierce that membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard against touching the wound.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put it on linen softened in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will remain set, insert or put a cane of lead in and leave it for three days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into its chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this swelling comes from the suppuration of a wound or an abscess; 
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it is necessary to cover that suppuration: 
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is cured, as we have said of the chain of lead. 
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come below the buttocks are nodules, and thickenings that come from the buttocks upward, or in the space of two parts, whether there is one fistula or several. 
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that thickening is old, it works, and still brings forth white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas persist.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by the fact that there is either excretion or flatulence when the patient has a bowel movement, and perhaps even one jumps out. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; 
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach the junction of the thigh, and to the base of the buttocks. 
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula extending to the fundament, and not extending: 
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you place your index finger or thumb on the fundament, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no crookedness. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is crookedness, then insert a tent of fine linen, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; 
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out through the opening, neither feces nor gas nor worms as we have said: 
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not perforate;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hurry with the cure 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends as far as the bladder or as far as the urinary tract, then the urine escapes and cannot be sealed by medication.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, so is the tendon coming up to the place; 
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no crookedness and the invention of pain around it, so it becomes well again, and neither medicine nor ointment is worthwhile; 
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas there is no stronger cure than work, and vanity of foolish wonders that get involved. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; 
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and lift their legs up to their thighs, and put their thighs inclined towards their belly;  
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then thrust a tent of iron, or of lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tendon comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the buttocks, you must stick your index finger in, and then feel if the thread has gone through. 
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And whether it is uncovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or flesh, then know that it has passed through. 
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not work a little, it cannot be healed. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	They say that one can heal some well, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the help that is done is that one heats a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as it has been said before. 
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And they put all of it hot into the fistula until it comes out near the buttocks.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do this two or three times as long as you know that those faulty sinews are burned, which resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then treat it with tents softened in butter until the flesh dries, then treat it with ointment that hardens and binds. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed like this, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot be healed otherwise; 
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent enters and does not pierce through to the bone which is at its foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of sinew, and you see the fistula under this covering from the heart;  
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the point of the beginning of the fistula appears and protrudes before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent;  
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be delivered and will fall out; 
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then cleanse those damaged flesh parts that resemble a bird's feather, and let nothing remain.  
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood comes, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery accomplishes two good things: 
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	This is to know, the cautery of these added carts, and the extraction of blood and the drying of moisture. 
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of softened tents in butter or crushed cheese, as long as the fire burns hot, and it has burned the carts in the wound.  
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with ointments smeared on hard charcoal, and these are dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula reaches as far as the base of the body and is distant from the body, it should be plugged at its root or base, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between II is the cloth or the silk or carts, where it is about to pierce, if there are only signs of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods: 
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	You either cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it out to the bottom, or if you can, put tents and treat it as first. 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too far in depth, lest you cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and cause involuntary excretion. 
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then the cure, as we have said; 
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	If it should be healed, then remove the covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the base, either with a tent or some other pointed instrument. 
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse this rotten flesh that is in the wound as much as you can; 
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then strive to restore the wound and keep the fistula behind the base.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is a lighter matter for the patient.  
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And fistulas are never made in this manner: 
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you insert a tent into the fistula and it is near or touching the base of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at its head in this manner:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put the twisted thread in two, and put the tent over the whole thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it pierces the margin of the base inward, then remove the thread from that piercing so that you insert your finger or thumb. 
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And treat the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and separate one from the other, and leave it for one or two days. 
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And restrain it several times, as long as the threads hold those carriages which are between them, and they intertwine.  
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too obstructed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make a bandage so tight for the placement of the cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of a sharp spatula with which one makes a fistula must be very thin on one side and sharp.  
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other side, not so, so that it does not cut what it should not cut, as you see here. 
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners:  
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude outside the fundament and at the head of the fundament. 
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are lacking have a bit of moisture, and still now or a bit of sharp citric acid or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body; 
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is so that you instruct the patient to stretch for relief in chambers, until the foundations dry out, and the threads appear; 
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and pinch it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots; 
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the lancet cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; 
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out at your leisure, then cut them off and sprinkle some hot powders on top that are in place of a cautery; 
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then you treat them with other treatments until they are healed. 
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, give the patient a strong and harsh enema to cleanse what is in the foundation so that it can come out clearly. 
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient complains, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. 
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you take them with your fingernail or with pliers and cut them off, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and he fears the incision with an iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary for you to administer a suture in this manner:  
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it through a needle, then draw the thread over the top and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide. 
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and remove the forming thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave it to correct the excess of blood; 
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a softened cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; 
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until they fall out, and when they have fallen, treat them with ointment and other cures until they are healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryness of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times dryness of humors occurs in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you scrape off with the point of a spatula or your fingernail the rind above it so that it does not become moist. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it heals as it should; 
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, shave it again more strongly than before until it heals a lot and is scraped. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is healthy. 
dou fremit	Do tremble
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A boil is a small foul appearance on the body, and it goes very deep inside. 
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes one finds coldness there, and one also feels it like a tremor of death, and it comes throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a cane from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that cane on the tremor, until the circles completely encircle the tremor. 
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand on all sides of the cane until you grasp it all around the tremor, and press it deep inside, and pull out the tremor from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make one like this from a chain of iron or steel, and let it be thin underneath and wide on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, but hold tightly to the pain, and press. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, cauterize the boil as it is shown in the chapter on cautery.  
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes one makes an enema of silver or artichoke, or melted bran or millet; 
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And sometimes one uses small and large instruments, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, both small and large, is wide above, where the belly is tied according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if there is a blockage where the stomach is bound, as you see, and the excrement remains inside pierced;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there are two openings on one side and one on the other. 
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly where medicines are placed is made from a bladder of an animal or parchment and pierced all around with small holes, and there is one finger space between each hole, then thread a thick strong twisted raw silk thread through these holes in an X shape or around it, and gather up the belly as if it were a goat. 
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then administer the enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is its circular shape: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; 
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until all is expelled, then he withdraws the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; 
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps all night, it is of greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply a clysma for a disease of loosening of the belly, and the medicine hastens to go, then begin again until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as for a child; 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the shape of a subtle clyster on which the skin is extracted:  
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division about the treatment of wounds; 
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine according to its accomplishment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made with, and according to the places or the wounds where they are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone and the cutting of sword and knife or of lance or of musket or of arrow or of similar things. 
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck or on the head or the foot or the belly or the liver and similar members. 
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment of each wound and begin with simple wounds of the head, for remembrance will come in its chapter.  
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a striking of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: 
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If it bleeds quickly from the cephalic vein itself, if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injured part. 
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And forbid the patient from eating rich food and large meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not bleed, let his food be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat. 
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place on the wound, if an abscess seems to be coming, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine. 
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding freely, and not moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later. 
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has already moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by bandages, then stitch them together, as I will say for abdominal wounds, using sutures.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to bone, and it can, and it does not hold except by a point, then sew it. 
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten flesh that does not reach the bone, then sew up all the rotted part and cut it out, then treat it.  
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if it has an artery or vein in the wound that is bleeding and cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with thread. 
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And put this powder on it so that it heals as if the fire had moved it. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way of the powder is: 
pren encens une partie;	Take frankincense one part; 
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts; 
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	quicklime three parts, and powder it subtly, and apply it to the wound, and remove it when it burns well and joins with all its blood; 
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it without being unbound, unless it swells;  
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do this with chalk alone, when one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but that the fire has heated the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has already moved the wound, do not put this powder on it at all; 
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows well; 
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure other cures until he is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle pincers; 
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you here after about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves in the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and do not put anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; 
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member; 
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be below, such as chamomile washed in clear water, and mixed with rose oil, and chamomile washed also in clear water, and other stones of the mine according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce it lower. 
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then bind it, and tie it, and cautery is necessary. 
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is kept by which the meat goes, then sew the heart onto the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. 
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then remove carefully and leave it for a few days, then treat it with dry dressings until it is healed. 
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cauterize it. 
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot obtain, leave them until the wound rots, is cleansed, and its exit is aligned.  
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on top of the powder that I have mentioned. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a cut from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if air escapes when the patient breathes. 
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then you know the wound is mortal; 
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it for the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not cease flowing freely, return to the heart, and kill the patient. 
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But apply an attractive ointment and bind it twice a day. 
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck up moisture and let the patient sleep on the wound for three, four, or more days.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor dislocations of the bone; 
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula; 
si la cure si com on doit.	if the cure is as it should be. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the leg or the back, treat it as you would any other wound in that location; 
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, suture it; 
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, treat it with powder, and if it has penetrated the bone and shattered pieces, clean the wound and remove any foreign objects if they are loose; 
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not mature, let the wound fester, so that extraction is easier. 
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	For a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great, medium and small; 
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from a large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude, by which entry of others (is possible); 
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one puts the intestines back in more easily if one does not put them back hot by hot; 
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold and enter more easily, and therefore it is better to mend the middle-sized wound because one can move the intestine to its place better than the others. 
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners: 
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds. 
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all the same they are more fitting with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and it is an easy matter to put it back in, this can be done in one of two ways. 
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen because of the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in two ways: 
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Soak a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you can cook in hot water squinant and cypress and spikenard, and apply to the intestine until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never make this wine restraining, and it is better to give alone for disentanglement. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestines with sharp or high and bad things that are cooked, for by this is alleviated the entrance to little. 
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with an instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids; 
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is better than cutting, that no one should cut without great necessity.  
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the instruments for splitting it: 
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside in the curve and do not remove it, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine has come out, if you put it back in according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, because this is worth a lot.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part below the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; 
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the breast higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture from the belly is in one of the two sides then put your understanding in this way that the injured side be higher than the other. 
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in large and small wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds put what appears to you, then have between your hands a minister gentle who holds all the rupture in his hand, and brings together the lips. 
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a half a space, and there you put in a needle where it has a good strong thread. 
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is beneath the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew four together. 
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain a double thread onto the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound evenly, and then leave one finger's space, and insert another needle. 
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the two threads as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need needles for, until the whole wound is restrained.  
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between subtle and thick, for subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well.  
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is fitting that they should be medium-sized. 
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And it is not fitting to drive the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin so that they pierce and open the wound before the suturing. 
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then tie the sides of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and apply bandages or cloths to the sides of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it uses one needle or two. 
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it consists of assembling the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the sinew together with one needle having a strong medium-sized thread. 
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all these sides together, pull the needle back to where you started, in the manner one sews cloths. 
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And leave a space between each stitch the width of two grains of pepper.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch heals a man, and I sewed a wound on a man's belly, who had been cut by a knife, the wound was more than a handspan large and the intestines protruded two handspans, and the wound was in the middle of his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I put the intestine back in place after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound healed until the 15th day, and I cared for it, and it was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they thought he would die, and it was a miracle. 
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. 
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put nothing more on the wound than old cotton twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching.
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and push it through from the far side to the near side. 
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the flesh straight through, take the thread or twine or whatever you have put the needle through and make it pierce from the other side from the inside out.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew just as furriers sew furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side and pick it up again on the other, until the entire stitch is complete. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is as follows: they bring the two parts together naturally and apply one end of the silk to the other end in this manner.  
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle or silk thread close by and make it pass through that place only, leaving the two ends of the silk. 
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle and make it pass through from the outer part to the inner part, along with the two ends of the silk. 
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make both pass from the outer part to the inner part, in two other silk threads that are on the other side.  
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the simplest way of suturing and the most common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen said these words, and some confirm it, that one must sew the abdomen with two needles, each with thread. 
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must put a needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew straps. 
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than those of other places in the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of the other wounds: 
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, in such a way that the artery has moved it, then put back the intestine, and the seam. 
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put on charred charcoal powder, and if the artery has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound swells. 
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And stitch the thread, and weld the sinew, and the muscle.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed.  
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicines, as soon as it begins to boil put old cotton on it, and move it twice a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need other medicine in several situations unless the wounds are complex.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound might cause a communal infection with principal members, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits. 
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then enemas of warm black wine, and similarly if the putrefaction reaches the intestines. 
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the arrangement of its veins, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the splinter jumps from the wound, put it back as you would the intestines, while it is fresh. 
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has become green or black, you must bind the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries. 
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the ligature and place the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until it falls out to ease extraction when the splinter comes out, and the wound heals. 
de la routure dou boueil	from a fracture of the eye socket
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are round and the wound is small, some men can restore them, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a spear; 
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was excretion and flatulence; 
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I have put a cure according to what I could, and did not stop trying to refine it until he was healed, and his wounds were sutured. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sutured, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his belly; 
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not have any pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank;  
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in a certain way: 
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take threads of large size, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it upon the two lips so that it tightens its mouth above; 
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut the thread's end, and this stays so that it cannot loosen, then place another thread afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; 
et cout la plaie.	and sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the hair burns in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, then one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal. 
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this intestine thread that is well frayed, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle and sew the intestine and rejoin it at the tear. 
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this way of sewing is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope;  
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is no remedy or safety except subtlety.  
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it gets old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and drawn inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the greenness of a hard and white knot where there is no pain felt, and it rises as high as the feather of a bird. 
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it jumps clear thin, and other times thick. 
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes it bursts forth, and other times enough. 
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And as I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it only flows by one of nine causes: 
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	Or by its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or because there is too much pus; 
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or the wound is infected and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in the treatment; 
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where by its property in the region digestion is slow, and sensation is late, and it swells naturally; 
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones: 
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I make you know the cure of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all the limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the diaphragm, or the intestines, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; 
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil, and ignorance; 
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of iron or of bronze, if the fistula is straight, if the other. 
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is crooked, then make a tent of lead, for lead bends and conforms to the crook. 
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well enclose it with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture passes from one opening to another and cleanses it. 
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then carefully bleed it to your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is well drawn out, and inquire well from the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it. 
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the putrefaction and the corrupted flesh that are inside; 
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the right place, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then put soft tents soaked in hot medicine, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; 
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply ointments that regenerate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves do not hinder you or the main limbs, as we have said; 
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, remove all the corruption until it is gone, then treat the surrounding flesh as needed until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed and returns as before, know that you have not gone far enough. 
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If uncovered and sought until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then restore the area.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is healed thus, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; 
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature. 
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small corrupted bone and you can remove it with forceps, extract it with an appropriate instrument for this purpose. If there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then grasp both moisture and flesh, and free the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something promoting decay on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotted around the bones, and then you will remove the bones more easily; 
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then allow only the corruption until the blackness is all removed, then restore the wound; 
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part corrupted and it reaches the marrow of the bone;  
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then you must saw and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed together; 
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was a young man of about thirty years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the humors came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open. 
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But his doctors, in their folly, worked so much on the abscess that they opened it and corroded a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many holes that all flowed with pus and moisture from the body. 
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no one who knew anything about surgery, until I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the holes in large quantities. 
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And his young body was becoming red and had a yellow color.  
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I stuck a tent into one of these holes, and then I encircled all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened therefore, and cut into one of the pores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was coming to the bone inside. 
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I scraped away what appeared to me to be the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except that which I removed; 
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with hot medicines for a long time, and could not solder it; 
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing into the bone, and I scraped it, and then removed it, and struggled to solder the place. 
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's breadth of the bone, and treated it thoroughly to its entire marrow, then I restored it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was healed and joined quickly, and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation often bled, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and it was of good disposition and had no harm nor contrary of any kind, neither at coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: 
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take a bandage and bind it to the head of the bone that appears, and order someone to extend it upwards; 
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another bandage of wool larger than the first bandage and tie it on the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh on the place where you wish to sew, so that the thread does not injure the flesh; 
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a hot coal or a wooden board below the bone to help cook the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to treat again another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and it does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then lay bare all the flesh. 
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put the ember underneath, and then treat from one part to the other the corruption, and let the treatment be as long as the corruption, one finger's breadth, as we have said. 
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and treat the bone where it holds on the other side.  
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut them. 
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in a finger of the hand or a toe, that is very serious, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you. 
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve does not oppose you. 
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. 
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore it is fitting to prepare an instrument for each type of work; 
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of illnesses. 
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Therefore prepare the instrument you need according to what is fitting. 
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder can dislocate either from internal causes or external causes; 
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated the corruption with medicine, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cut that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death, or from the greater malice of losing the limb. 
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes the corruption of member to member, and takes hold throughout the body. 
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you are bitten by a viper, and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion or an adder and similar creatures, if the corruption is at the head of the wound, cut it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, cut it at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm; 
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, cut it at the elbow; 
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there are no remedies except for the quantity of its venom. 
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same when the corruption comes or the foot: 
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then the cup after the other joint; 
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then cup the whole foot; 
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then cup at the knee joint; 
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;  
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to cup or sew the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister's bandage downwards, and another minister's bandage upwards, and you cut the flesh that is between the two bandages at a span wide, as long as the bone is uncovered; 
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cup or sew, and put on each side a linen cloth so that the sewing does not touch the healthy area, and causes the patient other injury and abscesses. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding comes while you work, quickly cauterize the area or apply some restraining powders. 
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it is healed. 
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to a man in his own foot: 
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He developed a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came in the back of his foot until it spread throughout his entire foot. 
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he immediately hastened to cover his foot and it was healed. 
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And a long time after, the corruption returned to the back of his hand. He came to me and I applied reparative things to him after cleansing his body, but I could not stop the corruption.  
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to hold his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of recovering the substance. 
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak. 
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he completely despaired, and returned to his land, and hastened to grasp his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I only relate this story because one may do something else if needed. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in the flesh, and lasts so long that it causes a large gathering of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it breaks open and bursts, and the pus escapes, and the wound remains hollow, like some vessels. 
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin on top is as delicate as a linen cloth, and does not reach to the bone or to the nerve, and this kind of illness is called "healthy" and is not called "fistula". 
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone quite clearly, it is called a "fistula" 
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and if the skin is so that you can peel back all around it, and even when it is thin, like a cloth; 
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not become foul because of its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you believe that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not quite clear, and the skin is thick like leather, then treat it with an enema as follows: 
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the bowels are large and the belly that comes from it has a foul odor, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: 
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take alum, oil and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey. 
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take some according to your need, and make it with vinegar and honey, and apply it as an enema on the breast, and extract the pus. 
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it while squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is softened and the pus is removed. 
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And at no time apply an enema of vinegar ash when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from grapevine wood, pour vinegar on top, then strain it and apply as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar ash, then apply an enema of vinegar and honey or a little bit of powdered litharge. 
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Where you cleanse it with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the body healthy; 
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this, and you are confident that the breast is well purified, then cleanse it with something that produces flesh in it, and take a plaster that draws out moisture, and make it with rose oil and wine; 
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treat the ointments; 
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening of the breast is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, widen it a little with an iron tool, and put in a tent made of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is enlarged. 
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, sew it up and leave only the place where the clyster can enter; and if the opening that leads to the bowels is above, make the cut lower than where it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the belly is perfect, do not allow flesh to grow. 
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, arrange it in such a way that the belly descends to the lowest place it is; for when the belly is perfect, do not allow flesh to grow and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, arrange it in this manner: 
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Let the belly descend slightly, and do not leave any of the belly. 
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy flesh, and spread them on a linen cloth that covers all the flesh;  
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cover as firmly as possible the opening of the breast so that it is wider than the first, and spread ointment softly on the other cloth according to the size of the opening, and put it on the opening of the flesh to straighten the belly, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once; 
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is outside the breastbone opening removes often to remove the bowels and know what runs from the bowels whether it is venom or pus or enough, whether digested or undigested. 
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take notice whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in some way and you see the nature that jumps up on the breastbone opening, know that the breasts are already healing and health approaches. 
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then untie it in the morning or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change another cloth and renew the ointment.  
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast swells with undigested food after many days, know that the breast does not air out.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health at all, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and those who do the opposite. 
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested bowels jump from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing. 
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to heal and are elongated, then apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diafinit, for it has a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; 
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance; 
puis le confit et en use;	Then boil it and use it; 
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and the same honey thickened by cooking will be better when diafinit ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it is off the fire; 
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	then make it into a paste and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer aristolochia longa and roots of orris, which are also like flour of vetch and centaury; 
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simples or compounds: 
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is thoroughly embedded, and makes an impression in the bone, or hard limbs, or limbs; 
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the fistula cure, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A felon is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is inflamed, and no heed is paid to it, then it comes to an abscess, runs and drains pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance runs all.  
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And corrosion comes to the bone, until a foul odor appears, and the flesh around it becomes wide, and the color is dark red. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous flesh that remains from the wound, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauterization is of great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; 
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to grow in, and there is a wound, then you should place a wedge under the nail that points at the flesh, lift it up high, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove all of it; 
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the injury with ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and treat harshly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal; 
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the flesh corrupting, cut it in a line as previously described, then treat it until it is healed; 
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is fierce, and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it. 
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail with a sharp instrument, cutting across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.  
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, apply something soothing on top. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two nails that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born in any part of the bone do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the bone may move. 
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The incision for one who is fleshy should be light, in a half manner.
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide instrument. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those who are born at the root of the joint are painful to treat.
si te tien dou coper.	You must hold them in order to cut them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born or must be delivered soon, it is fitting that you cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone in a manner suitable for this, and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The soldering which comes to the two bones together comes by birth or by soldering of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is fitting that you copy this suture so that it may repair according to its natural forms. 
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two soft cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not fuse together.  
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you may put it between two thin pieces of lead until the edges are fused together as it should be. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a suture comes to any of its fingers with the palm, treat that suture as it should be.
des vils	of old
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large vessels wrapped full of melancholy superfluities which come from various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer to him several times purging of bile, and then the juice of basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is according to two methods:  
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is where they are cauterized and strong black blood is drawn out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you tie off the vein and treat it thoroughly.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The waist is set according to this manner: 
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First raise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thigh is softened, then strain the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the part below the knee; 
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then let and draw strong black blood from it with your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood has issued as the strength of the patient can bear; 
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it up and instruct him to abstain from meats containing black coal;  
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full and hurt the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The raising of it is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; 
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then apply it to the vein for as long as from the top of the knee or in the part below the ankle; 
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then apply the leather to the incision and flay the vein on each side until it appears when touched; 
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the leather it also appears white like a rope;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then put the vein under it as long as it is raised from the leather, and then lightly bind it to the incision, then apply it to another place above for three days; 
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then flay the leather on the vein until it appears, then lift it with a razor as you did, and bind it to another incision as you did first; 
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then apply another cut, or several if you need them, then lift it and apply it to the toe, then train and lift it up to the second cut; 
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it by degrees, until it is all out, then the cup. 
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, put a strong doubled needle through the whole thing, tie it, and pull it, and put it below the thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. 
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And be careful that it does not break off, for if it breaks off, one cannot draw it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have drawn it all out, put moistened wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the site of the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not break it. 
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein if it is curved and does not cut, then it will cut the vein. 
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and this is the form: 
de la voinne civile	from the vein civil
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture. 
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the putrefaction that comes below the skin, as snakes and worms come within the body, you will find it between the skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude, just as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of linen from three and a half to four inches, tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time it becomes wet, you wrap it again in the linen and tie it. 
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out. 
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, and cause an abscess and putrefaction or elsewhere, and bad sickness. 
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it is necessary that it be treated bit by bit until the end, and nothing remain on or in the flesh. 
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And it sometimes happens that this vein, when treated, is V palms long or X, and one man once came to me to whom it issued from X palms in length, and when you cut it, it bursts I rays or perforations, and pierce it through to the bottom so that all comes out. 
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter which is inside be emptied, and apply to the place healing medicines that prevent putrefaction any day, then treat it as abscesses.  
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never put your hand on this vein unless it is open at the joint of the foot or leg, and it comes out with many pores, from which blood jumps. 
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Therefore cure it as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms which are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This ailment is called in our land “ox disease” because it often occurs in oxen and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh and travels throughout the body going up and down, and he feels it well from limb to limb as long as it runs under the skin where it goes, and jumps hard.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is engendered by the corruption of certain humors, just as worms and snakes and lampreys and roundworms in the belly come. 
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And there is doubt about its harmfulness because when it travels through the body and rises to the head and enters the eye by chance, it destroys the eye. 
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cleansed and milked, one cannot know that except when it goes: 
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight ligature, then cut it above and milk it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies;  
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it runs the eye, as we have said; 
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cut it above and milk it out;  
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and one must make the patient use cleansing of the body with dissolving medicines for corrupting bad humors, and beware of meats that cause putrefaction. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member; 
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; 
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and a little while after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to her shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another; 
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place and settled in her shoulder, and then a little while after it ran throughout her whole body, until it reached the other arm;  
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was turning again around her body, just as I saw it. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had seen many who had pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this, as I saw it in the woman; 
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and because of that appeared this constrained windiness. 
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and filled veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this illness being cured and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, immediately apply a bandage above and below, and then bind it tightly until that constrained windiness in the place has gone out. 
et cauterize le leu;	And cauterize the place; 
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it in your own eyes, so the cure of those who drive out windinesses, such as fetid pills, and serpentaria pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some that have large points, small ones, shaved ones, and sewn ones. 
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces; 
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls in any member falls according to two manners: 
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	where it falls in a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestines, bladder and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death which I will tell you hereafter appear to you: 
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is fitting that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in several ways;  
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it and care for the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone and cuts through the dura mater which is on top of the brain is when there is dimness and drowsiness and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; 
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it lacks strength from the nostrils, or the ears; 
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it loses speech and voice; 
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and pus leaps from the wound, white in appearance, resembling a poultice, and also leaps like burning charcoal; 
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, then hold back from treatment, and treat the arrow only if it is not embedded.  
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of an arrow when it strikes or pierces are that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; 
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and brings forth black blood, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: 
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know without doubt that death approaches.  
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has not been properly removed is that without any discharge of pus it jumps from the wound and the throat swells, and the patient changes color and sighs deeply and desires cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the buttock, it is below the small ribs; 
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and gives great pain and great sorrow and sighs; 
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach or intestines, by chance some undigested flesh may leap from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces or lodges in the belly, and does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope of a cure, nor of extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: 
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal. 
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell or pierced at the root of the nose: 
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and drew it out on the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any trouble.  
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew out an arrow from a young man that had pierced the fat of his eye below the skin, and the arrow was embedded, and one could only reach the point toward the fletching, and the arrow was large, the size of a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; 
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was healed, and no evil accident came to it. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: 
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beard, and I worked delicately until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.  
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I drew an arrow from a man, which had fallen in his belly, and I thought he would die; 
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and I dug around it, and drew it out forcefully, and he did not have any bad accident. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen in the back, and the wound was sealed over it;  
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural state, nor did he find harm in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sewn. 
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remained thus without suffering great pain; 
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And treat an arrow for a prince's man, the king, which had fallen between his nose and cheek, and was leaning slightly to the right side. 
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat it after it had fallen for three days. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I carefully removed it all at once, and he did not feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt numbness and pain under his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put a plaster on the spot that was atractive and digestible so that the tissues would not swell. 
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And the points of the arrow appeared to me. 
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied a plaster for several days and sewed up the wound deeply, and kept the patient still for a long time until he felt the arrow one day within his flesh. 
et il le me dist.	And he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put a strongly caustic medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow moving in its place. 
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I widened the opening of the wound with that caustic medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me. 
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And I carefully passed the time for four months, and then widened the wound so that I could insert the forceps and pull it from one side and the other, but it would not come out.  
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then do not cease to refine and engineer ways of instruments, until I took it one day as well-made forceps, according to the form which will come at the end of this chapter, until I tried them, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And many judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: 
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your practice on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything; 
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters compare on very few things, and on what is present and lacking, find nine works, and nine instruments, at the dismantling of strange things which happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs where they are stuck except according to two manners: 
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by the place where they enter, or by another part; 
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that comes out by the place where it enters is an arrow that enters the flesh, and rarely comes out now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotted around it, and the passage is opened. 
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day.  
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it will come out; and if it does not, pierce around it with a fine awl until the flesh around it is widened, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: 
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you do not milk it, but leave it until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow comes up to the bone, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck further than in the bone alone, and does not reach as far as the sinews, and the patient remains for several days without any bad accidents, then one may extract it with an engine.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very stuck in this way and cannot come out by force, then administer splints around it, as I have told you. 
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place until it is healed. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that one cannot see it, then one must search for all of it. 
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, draw it out with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then make the wound larger. 
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, remove the flesh that is stuck to it in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it. 
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And subtly, even though you do not break the arrow, draw it more easily. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the sinews around it are rotten, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; 
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and put it in any way you can draw the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; 
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and position the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell upon them, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	An arrow that has come from another direction, or where there appears to be something of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut above, so that the tongs can grasp it, and then extract it: 
si saut fuer maintenant.	If a leap must be made now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then start the extraction again until it comes out. 
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if there is an arrow in it, push it all the way through.  
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if it is a bone, and you see that pushing is necessary, administer the instrument with its point, so that the point of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument. 
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	Then push it in; and if the arrow is barbed, put the instrument with its point entering inwards, to ease extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is in a bone or muscle or belly or bladder or side, and it is close by, and you can cover it up, then cover it.  
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. 
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the cure as long as it is healthy. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tongs with which we treat arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways of doing so:  
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the butt end is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as it is in this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps for pushing and pulling is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are XXXI veins from which one heals oneself, of which it has or head XVI, that is to know: 
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two pulsating ones which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbages";  
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	And the two arteries which are in the two apparent temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers"; 
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein which is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head above the nose; 
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two cords which are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and you see those that are under the tongue 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly healed are five in each arm:  
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and is on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; 
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one which is healed, which appears manifestly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvation is the vein which is between the auricular and the annular, and it has two branches; 
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: 
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	The first one is below the curvature of the pocket of the left side, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right side. 
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein that is called "nesse," which is in the ankle of the other side; 
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are three veins below those ones. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The vein of the head which is behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, are that you raise up the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth. 
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then twist the patient's neck with a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Where your thumbs are, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, there is a sign of an artery. 
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet and put it under the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, and cut and loosen the skin and the vein well. Two should go through, and make blood come out as much as you see. 
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then bind and tie it until it is healed. 
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The lancing of the two arteries which are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines and habitual ophthalmia and for the flow of sharp tears as well. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the lancing is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient tightens their neck until the two veins appear openly.  
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And put your thumb under your index finger and then cut a small amount. 
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the skin above the vein at its highest point with your index finger and insert the lancet below, lift the vein upwards, and tie it off just as you have done for the other two veins; let run enough blood according to your need. 
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then untie the patient and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.  
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then bandage it firmly and leave it until it is healed. 
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have already spoken of their tying off and extraction, which is the beginning of this book.  
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	Bleeding from the vein in the forehead is worth as much as bleeding from the cephalic vein for old facial ailments, migraine, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears. 
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is this: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it steady with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see. 
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then untie the patient's collar, and tie the vein tightly until it is healthy and no longer bleeds or oozes. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it must not be too severe.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And the cutting should not be across the bone because the bone is close and may break the vein if it is thin.  
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Cutting the two veins that are in the two temples helps with headaches, and swelling, and redness, and pain in the eye, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their cutting is such that the patient tightens his collar by twisting a bandage as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the healthy one, and let it be a sinue, a long poke with a flame a wide poke, for there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break; 
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it on cotton, and tie it well. 
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The sinue of the vein of the nose is good for fever and for strong headache, and for diseases of the face such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, even when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the sinue is that the patient pinches his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes a long subtle flame, and puts it in between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not apply too much pressure, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bandage it for a night, because it is quickly restored. 
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The juice of two guindeges helps with the constriction of the veins, and at the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and esthiomenas; 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the juice is that the patient constricts his neck under one and the other, as we have said; 
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the masters stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a stool, then they lance the vein for a long time widely, then draw blood temperately, or as much as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then redo it in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and loosen all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle. 
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave it until morning so that the wound may heal. 
de la sainie des leivres	From the vein of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sinews of the veins above the lips help to glue in the mouth, and cause corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and pain and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is to have the patient sit in front of you and pull out his collar as I have said. 
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one is at the right lip and the other at the left, and you recognize them because they are black, and because around them are small black veins. 
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Cut both, and if you don't recognize them and are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of the veins below the tongue is done after the healing of the cephalic vein and this is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the healer is such that the patient sits between his hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein. 
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Heal then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the knife with which one commonly heals are healed according to two manners: 
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by puncturing all with a sharp pointed blade, or with an olive-wood subtle tool like cutting knives, and it is called “anesil”; 
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are broad and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the burning iron is very famous, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And one must open the raised veins full of apparent thick blood, and that contain thick and troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the olive-wood blade:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and it is for cutting the subtle veins where there is subtle citric blood
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps ailments that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly; 
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it behooves the healer that he bleed it abundantly, and that he guard against the artery which is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it behooves him to staunch it, as I have said; 
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it should not be piercing the flame, but cutting like a knife.  
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it behooves you to extract it, and change another; 
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want any vein of it, or you bleed in place of it the vein below the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens manifestly; 
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And apply the cautery to the flame, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the location of the vein, it is necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the area until you feel the pulse. 
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the location for the incision, then bind the arm, and apply the cautery to the vein with a flame.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And be careful not to wound the artery when you see the swollen area, for it is an artery: 
eschui la donques.	Avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protrude upwards like the urine of a child, and its color is red and delicate, know that it is the sinew of an artery: 
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your finger along its length, then remove your finger if the sinew shrinks back, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Bind the arm, and leave it so, and do not move it the patient; 
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood is not stopped, and it comes to you, and the medicine is not present to you, then bind the artery if it is open, for the head of the retractor.  
et estainche li sans.	And stop the blood. 
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day. 
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the blood is stopped, it is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, if the healer, as we have said, uses powders that stop blood;  
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping is not greasy in several positions because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the bandage on the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein of the arm in the middle helps it draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said. 
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply and finds the nerve, it will swell and the wound will become sore and perhaps cannot heal. 
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some people because of its subtlety, then you must lance the instrument numb. 
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And avoid the nerve as best you can. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein of the cephalic helps it draw blood from the head and helps with those things.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to cut in the middle with olive oil or myrtle oil flame because it is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerve nor artery below. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not be bothered if one must start over the first time. 
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance some men's veins swell at the first attempt, but it does not matter. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the cautery is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about healing is that healing is administered only to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses; 
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the healing be done in one of the three ways which are here stated:  
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic; 
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of spring in youth, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear; 
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours from the start of the day.  
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The saint which is administered to sick people has no determined hour, but only when need is by day or night, in all hours and at all times.  
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not suit to administer the sacrament to children until 14 years, nor to a woman carrying [a child] before the fourth month until the seventh.  
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They ought not to be bled those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to be administered the sacrament, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that he purify his bowels with a light clyster, if he has much retained phlegm, so that the veins do not draw from the bowels harmful superfluities dangerous to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor should one who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk so that he is filled with wine, nor those with dropsy be administered the sacrament.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And one should refrain from administering the sacrament after a colic attack, vomiting, discharge of the bowels, and multiplication of birth pains in women, and labor, staying awake, and fasting, and to those whose virtue has entirely departed, or through something of the arms or body. 
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly reduce the humors, if it is large without, through food and drink and through medicine, if you have the power.  
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter a bath, if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from a vein between the wrist and elbow, as we have said. 
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard yourself that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and from similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be bound and joyful, and let the bandages be higher than those on whom you bleed, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot stop the blood.  
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them. 
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the bandages with a drop of old oil, then put your index finger of your left hand on that vein below the place where you want to bleed so that the vein does not move and fail when cut. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee as cords in a snare, and if some are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these. 
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason it is necessary that the bleeders be advised in these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good. 
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, one begins again a bit lower than that place or higher hastily, if the veins are not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are swollen and the patient is frightened, one leaves him for a day or two, and does not tie the arm. 
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps abscesses will come.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter a bath, then begin the bleeding again if it pleases him. 
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the puncture is small, or the blood runs subtly and you doubt that it will not issue as much blood as you see, then put the flame directly into that puncture itself. 
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And perform the work quickly so that the veins become swollen. 
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this often happens when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put a poultice of oil on it. For it alleviates the body of blood, and the oil softens in that place where the oil is placed. 
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the poultice of oil in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stanch the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and the same thing makes a triangle and a bulge of it, when it is put back in place. 
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtle the sinew tears apart when it is too thick.  
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess comes, which happens often, even when it is not drained except at this time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened in hot water and salt for one hour. 
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it must be done after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it stays in place after a few days without any blackness or greenish color, then do not harm it. 
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, put on some aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mustard, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there appears an abscess and swelling at the site of the vein-opening: 
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft when pressing with your hand, that appearance is bad. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, do not put on anything of what we have said, for fear of cutting an artery. 
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another dressing until it is healed. 
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red.  
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it thick, let it flow out until it is thin. 
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.  
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make a larger wound, and let the incision be wide. 
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled a little and often, and one must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.  
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of incision is safe from bleeding and severing of nerves, and it is worth more than the incision that is long or wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to him whose body lacks strength for the incision, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; 
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is heated, draw blood three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, give him softened bread in thick syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chick peas, and a well-smelling syrup.  
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the flow of much blood, it is fitting that he inhale broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to avoid weakening his arm and bleeding another time, it is fitting that when he is weakened by a great bloodletting, he should bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength continuing.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to sever his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, should bleed for seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another place, it must be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and it brings fever; 
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so it is fitting to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening so that he sweats abundantly.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	After you have observed all the conditions of incision, and place your hand on his pulse as he is incised, so that death does not come in place of sweating, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent.  
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not right when you see to detach the arm, and make blood come out the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon it. 
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	And if it is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad; 
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But let it stay until it heals the second time; 
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Or you place the tip of the flame there, as long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out strong, and put a piece of silk sharpened to a point on it, and press lightly upon it. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, if the blood in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein above the arm is cut in place of the head vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healing is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, as long as the wrist turns red; 
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it is tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now crosswise, not lengthwise nor wide; 
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the opening be wide, and cut very close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the hot water until you have enough. 
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is summer, do not put the hand in hot water at all, for one puts it more in winter than in summer. 
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the cutting of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	Cutting the vein on the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand tight, and put it in hot water until the vein swells up so that you can see it. 
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if you cut across it, and even if you sever it completely, it doesn't matter.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not press too hard, for the nerves are underneath all exposed flesh, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is frozen in the wound and cannot come out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as needed, put oil and salt on the vein to heal quickly, and do so for every vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sinew of the hand on the left is equal to the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you on the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The herb of the sophene is worth against all illnesses that are below the body, such as illness of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and illness of the reins, and of the thighs and legs that are old, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its sinew is such that the patient plunges his foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and ties above the joint of the foot. 
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and many rains go from above the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So choose then a larger vein or one at the ankle that moves well. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you sinew it on the foot, be careful of the nerves underneath, and sinew across as if cutting.  
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And let the flame be gentle. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back into hot water, and let the vein be well emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the sinewing fails the first time, start again a little further up, for the flesh is salty.  
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do the same to the sinew of the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of strong men, and its blood is worth the pain of the hip when it's for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his sinew is such that the patient enters or bathes, and strains upon the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein. 
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, strain the sinew in all the ways that you can, and by crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it off, for the flesh is underneath, and it is very strong in men's hands. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, strain any sinew of his that opens or runs down both feet and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And draw as much blood as you see, then untie the ligature, and put cotton on top and remove it; 
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	from cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping vessels are made of horn, or of ivy, or glass. 
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is done in two ways:  
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting. 
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping which is done without cutting is also done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with heat, or without heat. 
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And cupping which is done by cutting and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely on the head. 
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are along the neck. 
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on the sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping vessel below the chin. 
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cupping vessels on the two shoulders. 
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glass upon the boils; 
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses applied to both arms; 
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cupping glasses on both legs;  
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cupping glasses on both ankles; 
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as one does when bleeding from a vein; 
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with full heat nor without heat, in any illness which comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is fitting to cup, or for customs, then we administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and both in between. 
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; 
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if some find fullness and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and darkness as well. 
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood;  
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are some who faint, and see by night blood and sadness and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is the least humid month, we order them to be cupped after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sinew of the thigh helps with the heaviness of the head ... which comes to it, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; 
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this cupping is in place of the sinew of the cephalic vein, and it is not fitting that those of cold complexion use it, or who have diarrhea, for this does them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it is not suitable for old people to use it, nor those who have cold diseases. 
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often become stiff, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower because of the fear of stiffness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Bloodletting on the neck is in place of the vein and the basilisk, and therefore it is good for constriction of the breast, and for a fissure of the channel of the buttock, and for all, and for fullness. 
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is not advisable to press too hard, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction or stomach and heart issues. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Bloodletting on the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the vein of the basilisk. 
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to press their hand on the spot, so they do not cut an artery, and there is no flowing of blood. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The applications of cupping below the chin are good for diseases of the mouth, and for the rotting of gums, and similar illnesses which are in the mouth.  
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in place of the health of the two lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	Cupping on the arms is as effective as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins. 
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the patient not to make too strong a suction, for the flesh is naked of fat, and under it are nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	A cup placed on the buttock is good for hemorrhoids in the fundament, and for illnesses below it, and it should be large, and made of iron so that it draws well. 
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it were delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it would make large wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	If the cupping glasses on the legs bleed freely, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the kidneys, and bladder, and loosen tumors; 
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are placed on the two thighs, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause emaciation in many constitutions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply a cupping glass is that you first put it empty, and suck temporarily, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; 
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then remove, and replace the cupping glasses, and take care in the constitution of bodies, for there are some who have tough flesh, and clear pores:  
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	it is fitting to strike only once, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep prick; 
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly. 
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is fitting to strike it twice: 
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to thin the way for the thick blood. 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is fitting to strike it a third time; 
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only strike once.  
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart; 
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, strike deeply and strongly, so that the heart is pierced only slightly, and it is fitting for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you moisten the edges of the cups with oil that is stimulating and dissolving: 
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; 
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the evening, of cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar thing. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and suchlike.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if he who is treated has tender flesh and large pores, it is not right to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or nightshade water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar [water].
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, should get up with watercress, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large superfluities, they rise from old wine, or vinegar of honey, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things. 
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two. 
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he wash himself when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are being treated if they are choleric, and if their wound is too painful and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in season, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little, and roasted meat, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and moderately spiced wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little birds and pigeons. 
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day that he will bleed himself, he should drink more than eat. 
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is fitting to give some men three times a nutmeg before the bleeding or after, to comfort the main limbs.  
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the wine be subtle, but it is not right that those who are hot drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	Cupping glasses that are placed without pricking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and gout, and on the belly and buttocks and the reins and the hip, because these limbs do not suffer from being pierced, and we only do it to draw blood from limb to limb, just as we put them on the breasts when a baby bleeds;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity which is at the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the arm to reduce the member; 
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And remove the pain, when there is swelling or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the swelling, or dislodges the stone from its place; 
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus it is done when it is put on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; 
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in illnesses of the pleura, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with hot water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two hands and a half palm in circumference, and it has around the middle one small hole, as for putting in a needle, and it is made of horn, smooth in front so that it does not injure the patient when putting it on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and he should put in the middle a stick of wood or iron, to place a bandage which holds, and they are big and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; 
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for old people, and for thin people than for fat people.  
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must put this cupping glass thus on the limb: 
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the bandage of wax or linen, and put it through the cupping glass across the stick which is in the cupping glass, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;  
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and your hands should be on the hole that we have said, so that when you want, if the vapor goes, you take off the cupping glass; 
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and you take the linen as before, and often start again, if you need to. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass which is administered for sickness of pleurisy, at all times acute, there is neither stalk nor hole, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and it is placed upon the limb only. 
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Cupping glasses are not administered except on limbs where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. 
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in those devoid of flesh, such as bone or sinew, and others similar.  
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses which are in sweet water clear without stain, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And put them for one night in sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies.  
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then it should be bled by vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put poultices on top. 
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and have shrunk, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put one on, for this is very helpful afterwards. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place up gently, and then sharply, very well, and then breathe on it. 
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the poultices heal too quickly after the body of the poultice, wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top until the poultice is softened. 
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the poultices are multiplied, put crushed vitriol or alum and similar things on top until they are softened.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you can put half a handful of peeled beans on the spot and leave them until they burn at the spot, which will now stop it.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other bandages. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the bandages do not want to stick, rub the area with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the bandage sticks in it, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick. 
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle a pinch of powdered aloe and salt, or ash on top, so they will hold now.  
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, thread of wool, that the fools who speak against this chapter have never seen any of the old books, nor read a letter from them. 
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason is the knowledge estranged in our land, for I never found any good one. 
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I do not know anything else, except through the knowledge of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated this knowledge through experience and through the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two previous chapters. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and linger on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age. 
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold meats, that is to say, cold stews, and broth of birds and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to his first treatment which he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourishes the patient with meats that produce great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, and turnips, and veal pie, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at half ignorance it takes more time, and sooner the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or rejoined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of young children. 
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But have no care, set the broken bone with large splints that hold it firm and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before. 
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not hasten his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with large meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a head fracture is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone marrow, and another in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every manner he should have his engine, and his proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place. 
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known that the bone is broken by the fact that the limb is twisted, and clearly shows by a gap, and sounds when pressed. 
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no crookedness nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; 
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but there may well be crookedness, or a crack, or a small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not right to move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that will come after, and then extract it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which goes in depth, and the two parts are separated, it is necessary to now put them back together equally, just as abscesses come to life; 
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if a hot abscess comes, let it rest for some days until the abscess is soothed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it straight as you can lightly and carefully, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces; 
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then remove it, as it should be done afterwards.  
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it is the hand or foot, or at your hand it is a small limb, or at two tendons, or at one tendon and at your hand; 
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are loosened, you should reset all the additions to their places as much as you can, and make sure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient. 
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: 
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it sets well and do not force it too much or squeeze it as those who cause boils and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have often seen.  
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while watching nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way;  
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. 
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And be careful that he is kept straight so that crookedness does not come when it is restored. 
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: 
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; 
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and hold it equally on all sides so that there is no blemish. 
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie it with light tow bandages, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand firmly on the whole bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less so that the break is then a bit further from the break. 
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy place, then take the other ligament, and return it around directly onto the broken place. 
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then bind the part below the fracture, and remove it moderately, not too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first chapter above. 
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the bandages strips of linen or cloths, so that they are all equal, then bind everything above with bandages, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing on the hot abscess and that removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days. 
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then remove your splints, and let them be half the width of a walking stick or wood from which they make stakes, or palm reeds, and let them be according to this shape.  
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the plaster which one puts on the break be a bit bigger and wider than the others; 
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large; 
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then remove the plasters as you did in the first hour, then tie a thread over it neatly, just as in the first hour on the break; 
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	tighter on one side, looser on the other;  
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be medium sized, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft linen; 
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in some works of fools who make their bandages from twisted linen threads, that is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not right for there to be less than two fingers' space between each plaster.  
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is bruised by the heads of the needles after the tightening in their flesh, then put under them wads of linen, or wool fleece, so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put strong splints on before five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess arising; 
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: 
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take flour which sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way to make a plaster that restores fractures in many positions, for both women and young children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.  
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way to make a plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and torsions: 
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take three bay leaves and frankincense and elecampane and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each ten drams. 
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Myrrh and aloe, each three drams. 
alechil VIIII З.;	Alcohol nine drams. 
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make them into powder and mix them with the white of an egg.  
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones and is worth much to many men. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another kind of plaster that is worth using for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and woundwort, each ten drams. 
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Myrrh and aloe, each nine drams.  
acaice VI З.;	Acacia six drams.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Armenian bole ten drams, and grind well, and cook with rose water or the white of an egg and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another kind of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and eases the pain arising from it, and heals the use of the bone, and breaks it:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new linen cloth, and moisten it in oil and honey, and place it on the area. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for calming a hot abscess and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: 
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of plaster for restoring a broken bone and for drawing out the matter from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part; 
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of plastering stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take mallow roots, flaxseed, betony, melilot, and sanicle, and violet flowers and chamomile flowers, of all one part;  
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind them, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.  
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that one should put on the broken limb, to restore it, dry things a little hot, such as myrrh and aloes and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another manner of plaster that is good for injury and pain: 
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take marjoram and goat hairs cut off, or bird feathers, and vipers bugloss, and cut them equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and bind it. 
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then unbind it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; 
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not, unbind it in a few days.  
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of rest or swelling, then hurry, unbind it and remove the plaster now;  
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light linen cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and plunge it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved;  
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen cloth on it moistened with water or rose oil, and bind a bandage over it, until you are sure of a warm abscess; 
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and lay the inflammation of the limb to rest, and let the pain be removed, then resume the binding subtly, and a piece of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; 
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and subtly until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess has pus and is red, painful, and swollen, when all of it has been removed, and you need plaster and bandages, do so again as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not unbind it except after III days or IV or V or VII; 
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it for XX days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals and brings the adjustment of the flesh close;  
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then the restraint more than the first, and it thickens its flesh, as I have said before; 
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the place dry more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there;  
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	so then apply a sharp hot wet compress, every time you unbind it, and do this every third day, and loosen a piece of the bandage; 
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	By this work then cut the nourishing to the limb, and quickly amend what the foolish mind does, that restores the limb crookedly. 
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is bad, and if it are works feared, and I do not see other thing than to leave it alone and work straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many manners of breaks are there, and various figures, and the causes are destined.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the bone up to the sinew which is beneath the bone, as it makes hay or wood.  
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And for this reason this manner of break is called "haichure". 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword cuts the bone above without piercing it, and this manner of break is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And the wound from these two breaks is large or small. 
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or blows of stone, or falls on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture extending near the membrane that is beneath the bone or above it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if a wound that is healed in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture “capillary”; 
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and it makes the piece of bone go down inside, and the edges are shaved as smiths do when they strike on anvils; 
si entre li piere dedens.	If the stone enters within. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft or moist bones, such as the skull of a child; 
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are detached from them like chips;  
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about it in its place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the probing with instruments, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similar hair is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs a little upon it, if it appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the patient's condition, and if you see any bad symptom, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, stretching, trembling, fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar things in various states, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeless accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone becomes corrupted and accidents occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus: 
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and take the head of the sick person and uncover it on the bone in all ways that you can, and over the figure of the wound as much as you can, and if discharge of blood comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess comes out, help him with what is necessary and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; 
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscess that comes out is appeased and be sure of the discharge of blood; 
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working: 
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is if you cut a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:  
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he puts another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is if you have a number of incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of unbreakable iron; 
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly so you do not bruise the head 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with rasps, but make sure they do not pierce beyond the bone where you are testing, and it must have above the point a margin or a circle, so that it does not let the point go beyond the bone. 
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the type of bone, so that you have rasps for all of them. 
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three kinds of rasps: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put the rasp on the bone and turn it at your wrists as much as you know the bone is pierced. 
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the rasp another place a little after, and so do all around, then cut with nippers the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, as long as you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers.  
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the sciatic nerve. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, it is fitting that you leave the instrument which remains from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisor. 
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if any of the small bones or scales remain, lightly remove them with instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of working is that which Galien says, which is safer.  
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and praise him very highly, for this is his word. 
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and the part is sharp on two sides so that the cutting edge is towards the bone.  
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike with a small mallet above so that you gently tap the bone all around and be careful of the cloth beneath. 
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is near the bone, strike lightly for you can strike it well without harm and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce as far as the fabric, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove the scales with a delicate razor, which you should have in various quantities to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you shave before using large razors, and then after with more subtle ones, and do not cease to do so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other delicate clippings and fractures, it is fitting that you administer care according to its direction.  
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that is not answered by one who has put his study into this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the fracture is exposed, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it upon the wound; 
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth. 
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as lightly as you can so that you don't burden the wound, then apply another bandage over it, and don't tighten it any more than is necessary to hold the wound together; 
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it like that for one or two days, until the abscess has quieted down, then untie it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, birthwort, and similar things; 
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make a powder out of these things, and put it on the wound, and then apply cleansing medicines without biting. 
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and make sure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, and do not allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth covering the brain, it will run and spread, and cause the patient great harm;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts upon the cheek a biting thing it stings above 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come except from the medicine that one has put upon it, because of its virtue, it is fitting that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and make a paste with them. 
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it in ways that are fitting until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones. 
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that below is cartilaginous and does not break; it only makes a bend or twist, and then heals.  
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you bite your little finger or thumb above the nose, and put the broken part inside against your index finger, and with a pouch by pressing, until the nose returns according to its natural shape. 
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part above the knee, and the bone cannot return to its place, it must be set even with the top of a large nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, do it again in the same way and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can. 
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the abscess has subsided, then bind the fractured part with two strips of linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	You bind one on the other side, if the fracture is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the strips be so wide that they fill the spaces of the bone. 
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer should moisten the bandages with butter, and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be softened in a preparation of egg yolk and mill powder;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the bandage on until the bone is solid and the cartilage is hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes put goose quills instead of bandages, and if the wound is covered with linen, hold it still, and let the patient blow on it.  
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do what you see. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if boils come to a head while you are working on them, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poppy seed decoction.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come out, apply a plaster on top made of sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put it on light bandages and do not tie them.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the broken bone is small and it is broken into many pieces, remove it with suitable instruments, then sew up the wound and treat it with things that promote healing of flesh and bone, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this. 
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the bone, treat it with bandages and put splints of plank until it heals. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the breaking of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated downward and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only superficial and not broken in two, but rather pushed inward, so the expert can easily recognize it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; 
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is in the left mandible, put your index finger of your right hand in it and gently push the fracture inward and hold it with the other hand by force and make it equal. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, so that it may be equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth move or are broken, tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply cerate to the fractured jaw and put a double cloth on top; 
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put a large well-made splint on top of the cloth, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up at the points you can reach, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, loosen it on the third day and then reset what has changed; 
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put plaster on it, made from powdered mill flour with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerote. 
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put a light linen cloth over the plaster; and if the plaster dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed. 
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healed in three weeks. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess arises, do as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, consider whether any piece of bone has been removed;  
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if it is subtle, use suitable instruments for this. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is large, sew it up, and put suitable plasters on it, to encourage flesh to grow, until it is healed.
de la forcele	Of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The clavicle breaks several times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: 
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	either it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and this is the easiest to restore;  
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Where there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the works are such that when the fracture is without a wound, you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the broken bone is; 
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the side;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the fracture at your feet so that the form is as it should be and there is neither appearance nor protrusion. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; 
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and lift the broken bone, and pull out the sphere with your hand so that you set the fracture as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the humerus back out because it comes in perfectly, then it is fitting that the patient lie often on his shoulder blade, and put under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have assistants push the shoulder down, until the bone of the humerus is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then straighten the fracture at your feet, and if you find it broken, it is necessary to cut it open;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and treat the fragments lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any pressure, then apply it to one of the incisors that you have. 
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put this instrument under the forceps, to hold the joint: 
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharpened, and should be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; 
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two heads, as you see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, according to the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; 
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of the hot cautery, if the wound burns and the rupture is small or you doubt the hot cautery, then apply the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if boils come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The constriction of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster of powder from the mill and yolk of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a splint underneath the armpit if you need it. 
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, and put a double layer of linen on top of the bandages and plaster. 
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a subtle splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And put the splint on top of the fracture, and turn the bandage up over the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And loosen from each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture properly, and you see clearly that the splint does not move on top of the broken bone, then leave it alone each day, and when the ligaments become slack, then tighten it. 
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small pillow under his armpit to lift the shoulder up; 
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if it lightens the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, then tie his arm to his neck and do not untie it until twenty days have passed lest a bad accident occurs; 
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then begin the plaster again, if you see he needs it, and remove it and leave him like that until he is restored. 
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and less for some men.  
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It sometimes happens that the broken shoulder or the wide place does not heal in the middle, and it should not be forced except by touch; 
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if you arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in all the ways that you can; 
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double cloth; 
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on a wide and subtle splint, a bit larger than the shoulder, and under the splint are shavings in no place of the shoulder, so use those shavings of linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly; 
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then bind it all with a large bandage firmly so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the binding each day; 
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it loosens, if you bind it and put the splint equal if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on their side; 
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in XX days or in XXV. 
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is fulfilled, untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that is put out lightly. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out in front and not below the heart, then make a poultice, and have the surgeon do what we have said for the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the abscess with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in half, but this rarely happens; 
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and all at once, and by chance vomits blood, and the hair appears in the broken bone, and one can feel it well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back and puts a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly make them equal in all ways as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; 
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put plasters and bandages on the broken bone with a fine powder of salt or another light substance, and wrap it in a cloth, tying it above the broken bone so that it does not move; 
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage around the back, and loosen it gradually, and check every hour if the bandage is loosening, and if it loosens, tighten it. 
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to untie it because of corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come in a manner of cures. 
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then loosen the plaster, and remove it until it is healed. 
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs only comes from their great size after the back, and chiefly within, and they only break because they are slippery; 
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one can well tell by inquiry what it is.  
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply a plaster, and remove it with a spatula, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of ribs leans inward, then the patient feels great pain and sharp points, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue. 
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and has pains and coughs up a great deal of blood, and it is a very serious ailment and the ancients have considered it a great danger.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is fitting to administer meats that inflate the belly, to expel the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, so that hot abscesses will not come, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, so be healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And say none of you where we put cupping glasses on the spot, to suck out pus, and it seems reasonable. 
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw the superfluities to the spot due to weakness. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the place with linen soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the binding even around, then it is cured by the cure of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone pointing through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the spot of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under the instrument to protect the flesh. 
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one should cut the bone and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and dress it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come, put soft cloths soaked in rose oil on the spot. 
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it while the place of this which it is necessary for an abscess, and let it lie often on the side where it should be, as long as it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone near the neck, and sometimes it happens that it rains;  
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back. 
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, if you notice their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are removed and pressed, know that the juncture of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it will heal or not, see if its limbs are softened, and if the accidents which are in its hands are soft, and on the back there is flatulence and discharge without will; 
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has turned it on its belly, there is discharge without will.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and he wants to rise up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal: 
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if one does not labor in its treatment. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; 
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; 
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.  
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bones are broken, it is necessary to cover them on a hearth; 
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then cure it with ointment containing charcoal, until it is healed;  
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your left hand in your pocket and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need them; 
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then remove it, and if there are broken bones, set them up and the bone setter heals the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It sometimes happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there would only be a slight decrease in height. 
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And bend down long, and incline toward the side, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and throbbing, and swelling as it breaks.  
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as far as you are above the fracture; 
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know what the fracture is and its shape. 
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is only at the head, you set that fracture equal as long as it is in its natural shape. 
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inward, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equal, put a plaster on it, then put a splint of wood or horn on top, and hold the fracture so that it does not move.  
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And apply the place beneath the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a hot abscess comes, do not touch it until the hot abscess is calmed down, and put on what we have said before. 
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	And then return to restoration, and extract it as it should be done, if there is no bad accident; 
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the manner. 
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of two manners: 
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	One of which is that you take a smooth stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two ends with two ties, and lift them up high, and have the patient sit on the seat. 
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then take the broken arm and bind it on a stick, so that it reaches the armpit, and put a curve in the stick. Then hang it on something heavy or have someone hold it down. 
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place your hands together at the point of the break, so that the break returns as it should.  
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one lays the patient on his back and ties his hand to his neck; then he commands two assistants, that one hold what is on the fracture with his hands, and the other hold below all of the ligament, and each stretches in their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, you should put one bandage below the armpit and the other toward the elbow, below the break.  
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the break is toward the elbow, it is best to put a bandage lightly and without strain, so that the break is aligned on the arm and at the elbow. 
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then align the break as it should be and bind it, unless abscesses appear.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess arises, do not extract it until seven days have passed, and place moist linen soaked in rose oil on it until the abscess has subsided; 
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put a plaster on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest. 
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And put the cloth on it, and extract it on the shoulder joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not been moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone has moved, then use splints and put on the break a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have two finger-widths of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three finger-widths beyond the break on each side; 
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then pull upward on the splinters, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, harder and less in distance. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the splinters and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heat, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said. 
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at the bandage every three days, so that it does not itch or swell, or come to the place where the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the shoulder, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if none of these accidents come, then do not unbind it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach. 
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool equally, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandages are loosened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is treated by the power of medicine, and you give it the meat that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; 
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, let it be thick. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in forty days altogether; 
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then you must loosen it and administer baths and ointments for healing to straighten the place. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and tight, it will remain for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus," one of which is small, and it is the one that enters the pouch; 
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, toward the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	sometimes only the large humerus breaks, or sometimes the small one, and sometimes both together. 
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When small bones are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; 
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when large ones are broken, so is the healing difficult, and more grievous than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is a small bone that is broken alone, then you must gently stretch it, and set it equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large bone, it is necessary to bind it more tightly; 
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any hardship; 
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's left arm to the part below his hand, or at the ligament, and another minister above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the sights equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one back in its place, and if there is any detached that the heart grasps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and set the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; 
si pren la cure.	if you take the care 
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of restoration boils arise, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; 
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie the poultice on subtly, until the boils are appeased. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg yolk, then apply splints, and let the splint from the fracture be stronger now, and a little wider than the others; 
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have six splints or arms in several positions:  
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and place it higher above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; 
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the thread with which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is fitting that you bathe the limb in hot water, until the itching is appeased;  
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be tightly bound when at rest. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone loosened, and similar things, so address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you fear that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like that for several days until the nourishment arrives, and then remove it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not loosen it for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	If he is in pain, then let him hold his hands at his neck and let his collars be even, and beware of movement and exertion, and sleep on his back;  
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the humors and constitutions of the patient. 
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at our fingers there are many small breaks, and they only come with weeping often.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is fitting that the patient sits upright and straight in front of him equally; 
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on the extended table and extend the broken bones and set them equal to the others, so that they are well joined. 
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And apply a plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not appear, then he applies a splint according to the quantity of the place. 
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And it should be wrapped in a linen cloth. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the base near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to squeeze it to his broken palm.  
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it as is fitting.  
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the wrist, it is necessary that you put a splint above and another below on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and bind the two splints together.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if a fracture occurs to any of our two arms, it is the elbow, then set it straight, as it should be. 
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And pull it out with the palm of your hand, and if you see that it will raise a small straight stick to lift the fracture, and it does not move. 
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is in one of the other arms, like the index finger or one of the others, then set it straight and bind it with the healthy arm that is next to it. 
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you tie them all together, as strong as possible, or put them on a stick, like a pouch.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and arrangement of a heated abscess, and heal those who come to you, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward. 
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and its restoration is done by tying one linen above the fracture, and the other below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his linen to his own side equally;  
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is near the bone. 
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, one of the splints should be towards the hip, and the other splints below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the linen be below the knee, and the extension downwards; 
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the splints on the bone equal with his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, so that abscesses do not form. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	the binding is done in this manner. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it up on the break with a bandage doubled twice in two or three layers, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put one thread long between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread above. 
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg. 
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the place eight between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal the tightening, then begin to tie three or four turns on the break.  
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go higher above the break, tighten it less. 
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints which are above them, then go back down to the head of the thread, as far as you come below the foot. 
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, until neither an abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing comes. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it should happen, and it loosens, and corrects what comes as we have said many times; 
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, it must be drawn out, if one can.  
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place and draw forcefully. 
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And when the thigh is broken like this and splints are put on it as in the shoulder or arm;  
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	in all ways, with restoration done like this, the patient does not weaken.  
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 10 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the furrow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is often no fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, except for a crack or hole, and occurs at any wound, and even without a wound, it is good for everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its proper place as much as it can be assembled. 
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and put a round star on it, if you need one, and remove it as is appropriate, then consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as a hot abscess and other similar things. 
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply to each ailment what is appropriate for it, until it is healed. 
de la brisure de la jambe	From the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile." 
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And every other fracture occurs as it does in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all one. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn them back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain felt, and it is clearly seen.
et torne desoz.	and turn below. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and put it equal, and bind the splints equally; 
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; 
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and adjust according to your skill. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of beech wood that can bind the leg on one side and the other, and they should be as long as the leg from the knee down; 
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them twice above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and with this bandage, the leg cannot lean to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should apply splints as long as the leg, and if they are made of wood, they should be placed on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, this is done in the fracture or where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And stir each day the leg to see if there is a hot abscess or another incident. 
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the cure lasts as long as it is healthy. 
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and are crushed, and there is strength only in several positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that a bone of the foot is broken, and you see these bones rise against each other, put the patient's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, and press it so hard that they return to their place. 
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the plaster and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small table with two sides plain, then straighten the foot carefully, and after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things which you need. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand;  
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be one span wider, then place below the foot that table which I have mentioned, and bind it carefully. 
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table below the foot. 
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be placed on the head of the table beneath the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.  
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is fitting that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said. 
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each incident as it is fitting.  
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone where the dagger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit wide-legged, then incline her to the back, and have her held from behind.  
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the bowl with cotton soaked in the nature of the ailment; and put as much in as I stand. 
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then lift the woman up, and gently tap her back, bit by bit, and then let the cotton jump until it reaches the entrance of the ailment, and return the bone with the hand. 
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so. 
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	The fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a bladder of a lark, tie a cane to the opening, and insert the whole bladder into the ailment.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the cane until the bladder is inflated inside. 
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The ailment will return the fracture to its place.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.  
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of a man's shoulder, or a woman's, is broken, if you restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; 
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice to it, and understand my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates in several ways the right path of restoration: 
enten le donques.	understand then. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	When a penis is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; 
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly. 
de brisure avec plaie	From fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cleansed now, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, and there remains vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if no abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes, leave the restoration until the next day, until the abscess is soothed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause evil accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent upon the heart uncovered, it befits that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear to you to be equal to your hands, then take this instrument of iron which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary for the healer to employ three or four, according to what they need in each treatment of a fracture. 
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let there be a round one and a large knob, that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be wide in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this: 
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "palanche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the visible head of the bone; 
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the end at once, so that it returns, and is equal one against the other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot grasp the bone well, it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone so that the instruments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, if there is a point of an instrument suitable for this, either an incision tool or saw, at your disposal; 
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then cut away what remains in the bone from sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; 
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put any cerate or other thing on the wound where there is oil, lest it cause decay and corruption; 
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and apply a covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; 
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times foolish errors have been made, and they have brought death to the patient or corrupted him sometimes; 
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the binding be looser and softer than for other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not fitting to put on splints; 
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around it, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that pus has formed in the wound, remove what you have put on it and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is fitting that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limb be aligned in such a way that the bone runs down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it gets worse, and it cannot be soldered but comes back again loose, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must want the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not draw it out at all, for many times death comes, but leave it until it rots. 
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps it will fall off by itself after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it alone. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From burns that come from solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sorry sight to see the shape of the limb. 
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.  
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care, then, if it is fresh to us: 
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if he administers astringent medicines, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acai, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with plenty of egg yolk or with oil; 
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and puts them on the wound in bandages, and binds it well, and does not loosen it for any days. 
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then loosens it, and begins another one, until the nodules are removed. 
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you bind it on a well-made piece of linen;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of linen is that it removes all swellings from the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the nodule has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then place a cup on top of it, and make the superfluity appear.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Where you shave it with any razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the members weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: 
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	One is because it was bound too tight, and not bound as it should have been;  
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishments could not come to the limb; 
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or because of a multitude of movements; 
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or for too great movements, not at its proper time;  
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; 
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and he administers a bath, and gives him joy and relief; 
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then he puts pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out a great inflammation, and he often raises it with hot water, until the inflammation subsides in the limb; 
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and it returns to its natural shape. 
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a crooked limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: 
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; 
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and it brings great evils, and by chance death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the inflammations and torments are fresh, it is fitting that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, roots, melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And make a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the juice of mallow and mix it with the fat of a ewe or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top. 
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take ripe figs and crush them with flaxseed meal, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation removed by constant and long rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the crookedness is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron instrument, then it should be cut up to the bone, with a fine, light incision. 
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And put a cushion and care into the treatment. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is necessary now bring it back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if you delay, the wound will swell, and by chance it will be replaced in its place with difficulty.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, it is not good to move it at the hour when it is swollen: 
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times bring forth spasm and other pains; 
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in all ways, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then leave him, until his abscess sores are soothed; 
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and care for each limb as it comes into its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It sometimes happens that the jawbones are dislocated both, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are sometimes loosened from their places, and softened a little; 
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the ground, and cut off the saliva from his mouth that he cannot hold, nor can close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.  
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through several arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, and do not delay; 
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put their eyes behind the pocket of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; 
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be unbound, to put it even. 
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he must hold the eye equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if returning it is difficult, even if both jaws are together, apply a mixture of hot water and oil until they soften slightly. 
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not hesitate to return it, as we have said. 
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening it, apply soft cloths with a bandage made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft linens. 
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders should be lying between two cushions so that he doesn't move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he make any effort to raise himself, but takes light food as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are tied; 
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not work at opening his mouth to eat or drink as long as the jaw is well tied and healed. 
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper positions, then fevers and usual pains arise, and perhaps dissolution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is lost; 
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times they died in nine days. 
de la forcelle	Of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forcele cannot dislocate from within the continuation of it and the foot, and it is dislocated sometimes outwards, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place with your palm, and it will return; 
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it. 
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the head which is towards the elbow cannot dislocate. 
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If it does, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it in its place, as we have said;  
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed. 
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in the same way reset the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.  
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three ways: 
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates to the part of the armpit below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is to the part of the buttock; 
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it dislocates to the part above, and this rarely happens.  
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate within for the nerves; 
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and many times dislocate below towards the armpit, similarly for those who have a bone protrusion, because it must be hastened. 
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, it enters with difficulty and returns with difficulty. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it sometimes happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of it.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must test it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment. 
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it falls towards the armpit and puts a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest diversity between them. 
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit towards the chest, the head of the shoulder as if it were a bone.  
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor move it in any way. 
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated at the top, unless it is hidden, for you will find it clearly when touching. 
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is new, or if the child is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	The method is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand upward, then puts their fingers under the armpit, and lifts the joint forcefully upward to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upward, then puts it below. 
si venra hastanment.	It will come quickly.  
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within three days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; 
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and let the patient use a soothing and softening poultice, such as a decoction of marshmallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied. 
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then let the patient be laid on their back, and put a cloth of wool under the armpit, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the patient's heel upon the cloth, and gently lift the head of the shoulder, and pull the hand of the patient; 
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another assistant hold the patient's head so that it does not move down;  
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see the resetting according to this method: 
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is for you to have a man who is larger than the patient present;  
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and let him stand straight beside the patient and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm; 
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another minister pulls the patient's hand towards their belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then you can put something heavy on him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And we reset it in another way: 
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And one sticks a long coal in the ground, whose head is as round as a pistol, and is neither too thick nor too thin; 
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then it is placed under the patient, but with several cloths on top of it, and the patient lies along the length of the wood; 
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then their hand is extended in the opposite direction, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: 
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a coal two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round head to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then lay upon the head of the wound cloths underneath so that it does not stain the patient and then put it under the armpit of the patient 
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And extend his arms upon the length of the wound and bind the shoulder upon the wound and the arm at the head of the hand then put the arm upon the rung of a ladder that is wide and let the hands be extended downwards and let the body hang down on the other side 
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint will come back together now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put under the shoulder a sphere of wool equal in size; then apply a plaster prepared with powder from the mill, frankincense and egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and bind it; then bind it under the shoulder firmly, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is fitting that he rest a little while, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly 
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is firm and not softened, it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place by moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauteries to three holes, as it is shown in front of this chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all of this and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. 
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And know that the joint is never fixed in its place. 
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	Dislocation which is towards the shoulder blades, or breasts, or behind, is done by impulse and extension of the hands, and it is administered elsewhere; 
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure as long as he is healthy. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, then have the patient bathe many times, until the stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation one must
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at points and at points it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it is dislocated in all parts, and even in front and behind, the dislocation is not rejoined, for one sees it well and feels it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it is dislocated according to each shape. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick knife with the healthy one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it behooves you to reset it as abscesses come for if abscesses should come, it would be a hardship to reset it; 
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be completely reset, even when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	If it is worse than other dislocations, and there is greater pain, and perhaps death comes. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you extend your hand with both hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and your arms are spread, and the hands from above according to the way it was twisted, then and below, push the joint at its edges together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand onto his hand, and pulls from the root of the palm or the costal bone which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and have two assistants extend the arm, and hold it so that it does not move during the extension; 
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the assistants join the joint to your hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, put a dry plaster on it with egg yolk, and bandage it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then unbind it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; 
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not holding well, start the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days, until it is firmly in place; 
puis le deslie.	then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; 
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or put a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and put it in a bath; 
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then puts the bandage back on, and then goes into a bath; 
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And thus does it twice or three times, until it is healed; 
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, put cow dung moistened and heated with butter on top of it;  
si revenra a sa disposition.	It will return to its proper position. 
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is lighter than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the flesh does not swell or an abscess becomes hot. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return is such that you place the afflicted hand on a table and extend the fingers of the hand, and look at it and put it equally so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns. 
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place. 
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and flexion. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table and the surgeon puts their hand upon that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good. 
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, if you bind soothing poultices for abscesses on it, and leave it thus without moving. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after several days, the joint remains crooked. 
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And do not harm the patient further than that while the hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery. 
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other remedy than to burn it with a cautery, and perhaps nothing else will do.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the wrists of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly. 
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then stretch the fingers and push the dislocation back into place as far as it will go. Then support the head of the finger and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated 
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And from that time on, as we have said, untie it during the day and make it move, and rebind it at night; 
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same when it is dislocated on another side. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	For the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	The signs are that the movements jump without volition and it cannot be held, and many times some limb is softened, whether the two thighs or the two arms or one. 
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often it moves the shinbone in four parts; 
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	The one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez": 
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you consider if the gilbositez came from childhood: 
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from falling or impact or similar things, the old ways of cure said in many words, where there is not much profit in all; 
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilbositez that comes at the front of the foot, there is neither remedy nor healing; 
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say.  
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and let the patient lie on his back in an even place, and have a stretcher beneath him so that he does not get bruised. 
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then put one tongs in the ground at the head and the other at the feet, and tie a cord under the patient's buttocks, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles. 
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And let two ministers hold the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two tongs.  
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And let them be well fastened, the tongs as we have said, and the surgeon put his palms on the spine straight, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board three arm-lengths long and wedge it under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the head of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine.  
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table and press firmly until it returns to its place. 
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see that it turns in the hand, do it at the elbow. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And put two hot coals on the head of the patient's arm one large and two others towards the feet, and have between each coal, above and below, a palm's length of space. 
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And have in each coal one hole where the elbow goes and let the coals be firmly in the ground so that they do not move. 
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each two coals have one turning coal so that the limbs turn and have in the two turnings two small coals a palm's length long to turn the elbow.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the strap which is among the splints to the elbow towards the head and the other strap towards the feet to the other elbow and each of the assistants turns his elbow at all the straps and the master puts the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on them with plenty of egg, and then bandages, and then the splint of a tablet three finger-lengths long, which should cover the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until they are healed. 
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if anything comes at the end of health, it is fitting to administer softening and soothing remedies with the splint that we have mentioned before. 
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a piece of plumb, and sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation. 
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have presumption.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Perhaps death would follow. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place as dislocations, and not as other joints do. 
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:  
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inward and outward, and front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more often inward than outward, and seldom dislocated front and back. 
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of this inward dislocation is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire. 
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And there is a warmth that comes from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh bone has come loose there. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who is about to die, it is so that this event is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has it beforehand, if it is well aligned according to its completion; 
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, do not bend the knee twice without pain, and if one wants to make it walk, it cannot beforehand, and it retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it walks, it passes on the heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has it behind are that he cannot spread his knee nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The resetting of this type of dislocation is such that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, if there is no cure; 
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it should not be presumed. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, hurry to return the joint, extend it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; 
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return, and does not need another cure. 
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a tie that is tied above the knee; 
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another assistant extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then you bind him tightly with a soft tie above the thigh; 
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head of the tie;  
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and you extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, it is necessary to put a cure in its place. 
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the thighbone, it is necessary that you place the patient on their sound side, then put the tie at the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the tie upwards towards the groin, and towards the kneecap; 
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another minister to grasp his arms, and embrace the thick part of the thigh of the sick man, and extend it in a straight form. 
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	It will now return to its place. 
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, it is fitting that you bind the two feet of the sick man together with a strong tie above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two parts more than the others.  
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then it should be hung on the top of a beam, and be raised two arm's lengths above the ground; 
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command another minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the sick man who embraces straight the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.  
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is to the exterior, lay the patient down as we said for those with gout, and tighten the bandage properly on the diseased leg and on the foot too. 
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one ember between the patient's thighs in the shape of a letter M. 
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place cloths dampened with water around it so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each limb towards them and the practitioner places their hand equal to the dislocation. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a table, and press it down as we have said in the setting of the fracture, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg quickly and according to what I have said. 
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the practitioner's hand on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand and extend it downwards towards the knee. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is not right to stretch the patient out or lift him up from the ground, but he should be as though his hip were dislocated in the shoulder, as we have said about childbirth on the two hips. 
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And he should be face down, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table. 
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal. 
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then adjust the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. 
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And he should rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then untie it, and make it move gently, until the limb is comforted. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated according to three manners: 
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards; 
et ne desalue point devant.	and it does not dislocate forwards. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are such that you order the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at his thigh, know that it is dislocated; 
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and draw it back between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee so that they form
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another attendant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg at his thigh easily; 
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on it, and let the leg air out at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then unbind it. 
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let the patient not work at all, until the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all aligned, then apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes loosened, and sometimes completely dislocated, both within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tense before the part where it is dislocated: 
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The setting back should be light, and one should gently extend the hand to its fingers when it is only slightly displaced. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated altogether, it befits you to make the patient sit upright, and hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle; 
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and thrust the foot upwards beautifully; 
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; 
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is good; 
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, start the work again, for it will return; 
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a stick firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so that he does not bruise the patient; 
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or a ligature, which he ties around the ankle; 
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then have each assistant extend equally, and let the stick be now between the patient's thighs to hold him down when he is stretched; 
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will quickly return. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is set in place, apply a plaster and bandages on top, and bind them tight, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bandages are not too tight. 
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, rebind them; 
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; 
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is fitting that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they can be nicely extended without effort, it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any bone of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table straight, and place your foot on what appears of these joints, then press down firmly with your foot until it returns; 
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is equal, and there is nothing visible, one places under the sole of the foot a board with two legs, then they bind it tight, and leave it for three days, then unbind it. 
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it rest until it is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound accompanies the dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: 
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	do not be presumptuous in the cure if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not dare; 
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning use soothing things to draw out the abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you do not see hope of recovery; 
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, now reset the limb in its place so that the abscess may drain.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess that is hot, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments; 
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if the dislocation is with a fracture, and small bones are broken off, the surgeon must do as we have said in simple diseases; 
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, as I have said, for this is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. 
