O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment and have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the virtues except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is driven away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. 
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will bring together the forms of the cautery irons and the other instruments of the work with the fitting of their declaration and preparation, as it is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to be learned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the placement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and rest of the veins, and their place of origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is nothing, and with practice it is something. 
et meismement en l’art de main.	and the same in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned will beware lest he fall into error and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Just as I have seen many times more than those who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and experience. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish barber who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck. 
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.  
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another barber who treated a stone of an old man, and the stone was large; 
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	He took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.  
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another barber who took in charge a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had a wound; 
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the barber, full of ignorance, removed the break above the wound with sharp tools, and did not leave the wound any dressing, and left it like that until the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commanded him not to unbind it; 
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and let it stay like that until the leg was all swollen and the foot, and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come untie the leg;  
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I untied it, it was so easy and he did not feel any pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to go through the limb until the limb was completely lost. 
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another wonder which drains the festering abscess, and then inflames through the malice of its ruler.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two divisions: 
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in several situations; 
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.  
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that fools cannot speak badly of you. 
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your arms in defense, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised. 
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave curable diseases without sorrow.  
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen said in some of his admonishments:  
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not undertake a bad illness unless you are called a fool. " 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries with water, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet. 
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of instruments, and of the bindings for the cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and of similar things; 
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and sprains, and of similar things; 
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.  
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of the help and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and subtlest science and the most secret reply; 
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of these spoke many of the wise, and agreed to this; 
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.  
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the cautery helps universally for all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions. 
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	That is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, they agreed that the cautery is of great help. 
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite.  
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That the cautery is of no use for diseases that come from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness.  
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And those who said the opposite stated that the cautery is of great help for hot and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not interfere unless those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the chapter on cauteries, the diversity of complexions of men, and their predispositions and the causes of their diseases, and the outcomes and the space of time. 
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other complexions, even cold and wet diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mire assembled and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery together with fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than the cautery of burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come near any member but that which is cooked, and does not harm another member no matter how close it is.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning remedies come from one limb to another while driving away, and they bring healing diseases to the limb.  
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And by chance they kill the sick person. 
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.  
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things. 
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should take away from you the secret which is revealed about fire and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the bodies as the philosopher says in demonstrating.  
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Or receive it in your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what times cauterizations should be done, and they drew up precepts.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the following harms are alleviated by the aid of cautery.  
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially if the cautery is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a time when greater harm may come to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish people do; 
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return. 
et il le dient ensi;	and they say so; 
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its swiftness of action, and for the power of its work and its mastery.  
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the illness comes at times according to the patient's complexion, the place of the illness, and its nature. 
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And if the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of meats and similar things, then cauteries administered in the place where there is excess superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return.  
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens rarely. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is as follows. 
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cautery is of value after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of healing for any illness and they are of no value, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are milder than iron, and they say this only because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance. 
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the burns of a cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some men. 
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And cauteries of gold are worth more than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly. 
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if you heat it too much.
si font au feu;	It will catch fire.  
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there are enough obstacles. 
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery which we have shown to be suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	with olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and the ears, and because of many dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III humors or IV, according to what the virtues and the ailment and the custom of the patient can suffer. 
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the head of the patient fall back. 
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs;  
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; 
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds afterward, heat the cautery that is called "olivare", of which this is the form: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move downwards while squeezing your hand bit by bit, turning around;  
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you see a little bone below;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you;  
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a piece of silk, put it in warm and soft cotton and apply it to the area and leave it for three days. 
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then apply moistened cotton buttered.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it on until the burn is gone. 
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrapharmacon" until it is healed. 
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	And for this reason, it is aided by movement. 
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then cut away what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should leave the cautery on for as long as possible and press it so hard that it sinks into the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their looms so that the stagnant humors are purged out. 
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And one should leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards one must cleanse and suture it 
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; 
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it out;  
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs; 
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and especially when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more gentle and moderate for me, and I use this one in all cases to achieve salvation. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and purging of the head and oils and plasters; 
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one makes the cautery as we have said before, it is of no value 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the head of the patient is strong and not too cold; 
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above.  
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterward make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery where the place is called "vessels"; 
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is these places where one applies cupping glasses;  
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and align your hand so that you do not see the bone: 
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more delicate than those with which one cauters the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by cleansing medicines, and the other cures have been done that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help at all: 
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then make cauteries according to two ways, that is to say with hot medicines and with fire. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	Cauteries with hot medicines are such that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into a small piece as large as the head, and then place the temple where the pain is in half a manner so that you can put the piece of alum under the skin; 
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is placed, bind it well and leave it like that for twelve hours; 
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then unbind it and apply garlic over the piece of alum, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; 
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then put on cotton soaked in butter as much as possible. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of anointing until it is healed; 
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that this is done with any burning medicines which I have written or you may treat with burning medicines.  
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery in the following way:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a small curve, and in the middle a small opening; 
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little, so that half of the thickness of the kernel is burned; 
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And remove your hand so the artery does not burn, which is outside, and a lot of blood flows.   
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterward put cotton in oil of cedar and place it on the spot for three days; 
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then he puts softened cotton with butter, and then cures the place with ointment until it is healed; 
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at the very tip, and beware of cutting the artery in this migraine which is not old. 
de emigraine	from headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you sharpen the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; 
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And draw thus on the painful spot a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone; 
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves should only be concerned with the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear even in him who knows it, and he who is not a student and experienced; 
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work halfway done; 
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed; 
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see it, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two knives; 
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cautery is better than that one and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has worked on it with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pointing all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is felt, and you move a little bit away from the root of the ear once you have marked the place to make the incision. 
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And make 10 points around each ear; 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area until it is healed.  
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torment which must be cured by cautery is none other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases. 
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not perform cautery on those that seem to come from dryness and spasms of nerves.  
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this kind of torment that moves from phlegm by purges and gargles, and this is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one in the root of the ear, and another a firebrand behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; 
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cauterization on the head of the ear above a spot below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; 
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until half of the kernel is burned; 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery: 
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the knife that we have put forward, but it is a spot more subtle, and it is fitting that the knife be a spot larger; 
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards cure the place as I have said before, until it is healed. 
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: 
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the two horns of the head, and one on the head itself, and one on the vein which is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach. 
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And let it be cured as we have said before. 
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, one should give the patient large doses of herbs and pills that modify the brain. 
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	Afterwards raise the head of the patient altogether, and put mustard plaster on the back of the head as it is written or treated in the treatise of plasters. 
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the manner of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do as I have said. 
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healed thus, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not, make him three cauteries from the top of the head descending to the neck, and have a space of two fingerbreadths between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and the cure like the others, and if you see it added, and the patient is suffering, then make the cautery in the middle. 
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if needed, two others on the two horns, and the cure until it is healed; 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauteries be called "olivary", as I have said before.  
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is fitting that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have said before; 
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after shaving the patient's head, then make a cautery on the back of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; 
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back; 
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let him leave it until the most painful part is burned, then lift your hand. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment, while it heals, use the cautery called "olivary" which we have previously mentioned. 
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffering from a lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make him gargle and chew often while modifying the brain with good meats; 
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after he raises the head in the middle, and he makes the cautery as we have previously said, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn;  
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and suffers, make him cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, do him a subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or moist humors corrupted and gross phlegm, then the cautery of parts cauterizes as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then let him drink things by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is stated before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After you examine the head of the patient; 
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Then make a well-made linen bandage, also like a circle, and place it around the head. 
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the patient should be crossed, and held firm in all directions.  
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Then apply a poultice made of old birch butter; 
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And warm it gently over fire so that the patient can tolerate its heat.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Then remove the circle from around the head and let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this for the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.  
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see that the cauterization is burning too much, make several points with the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery softens the brain properly. 
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then apply softened cotton soaked in butter and gelatine fat. 
de l’awe des eulz	From the eye of the eels
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the ill humor first comes as the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he commands the patient to turn their head back and applies a cautery around the head, making two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the ailment is at both ears together or one if the descent is at only one. 
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; 
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with a piece of cloth as you have. 
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution with which you will stretch it; 
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never make a cautery or haste below the two bones behind.  
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the surface outside; 
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that these are superfluous cold phlegmatic things, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter descending to the eyes:  
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where it hurts below the two bones. 
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if there is more need, I cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.  
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the body of tears by within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not profit, then give the patient three nights' worth of boiled chicken broth. 
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After he rinses his head, he applies a cautery with olive oil in the middle.  
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And he makes two cauteries with a cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little bit below the hairs. 
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.  
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called “clavilis”:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by sickness and moisture, then the cautery of this instrument which is called “olivare”.
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are. 
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let go of the hand except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	Where hair points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to parchedness, and pricks the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: 
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.  
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; 
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in your healthy hand;  
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	afterwards draw upon the paper of the eyes a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; 
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then he puts softened cotton in egg white and parsley broth on the eye, then he heats the cautery which has this shape: 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked dot and dot many times, so that the heart is burned at that spot; 
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs rise at the point of the eye; 
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days, then he puts softened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; 
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed.  
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on that same spot, as you did first;  
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are absent, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and it is even, and they do not prick the eye. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; 
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one dram, and grind together well; 
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it on the paper over the hairs; 
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the ailment resides in one eye only, then you should work on that one, and if in both also;  
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put under the eye moistened cotton steeped in egg white; 
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the head of the patient be in your hand and put your finger showing on the medicine and press it a little and lift all the time that the patient feels a bite from the medicine for he will feel a bite as of fire. 
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite has passed, lift the place of awe and see if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; 
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, put more of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked until your works are equal and your eyes are set in place; 
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put softened cotton in butter until the burning heart is gone, then heal the place of anointing which is called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.  
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well at your work with great care so that no part of the medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure until it is healed; 
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the cautery made of myrtle:  
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that be your constraints; 
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And let not the right way be withheld from him whose study is this art. 
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the healing of a fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then it is necessary that you burn it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap;  
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that he does not move or turn his head; 
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	Afterward, put softened cotton in egg white or parsley juice on the eye;   
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After you heat the cautery which is like this: 
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	And it is shaped at the tip like the form of a swallow's feather, together with which is the cautery; 
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see, if it is pointed from one tip to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; 
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But nevertheless, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.  
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and drawing out the corruption, and drying it; 
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, so work on it, and draw out pus from there;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After put the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where there is no iron on top of the eye, so that your hands do not tremble;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the fat of oil, and corrupt it. 
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you reach the beginning of the cautery to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, start the cautery again one more time, and another if you need it, and leave it for 3 days. 
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Afterward he puts it on softened cotton in butter, and cures it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put an aqueous corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered.  
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And let the king rule according to what would come in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand a fistula, and make the place;  
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Afterward put in the fissure a subtle linen thread of which this is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	And make it to the quantity of one third of an inch;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or the thread firmly, and let neither the patient nor anything move so that the melted lead does not run to its oil; 
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is necessary to put moistened cotton on the patient's eye in wine or ale. 
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The plum tree heals the place of a fistula and the healthy one by marvelous health. 
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer a poultice to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of crevices in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks happen in lips which are called "hairs", and likewise in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in divisions, and the treatment does not profit, then heat a small surgical cauterizing knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it hastily into those crevices as far as the fontanel.  
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cure the place with wax until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the jaw or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it is rotten and red and swollen and becomes a fistula; 
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you cure it as we have said in sections, and it profits nothing. 
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After you burn or pierce the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron heats up,
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do so once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed. 
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is treated thus, it is good; 
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter. 
dou movement des dens	with the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and that does not work, then put the head of the patient on your lap; 
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	afterwards heat the cautery in the manner that will be shown hereafter so that you put a cane on the tooth; 
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and quickly insert the hot cautery, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; 
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	afterwards lift your hand and start the cautery again according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After the patient fills his mouth with salt water, let him hold it for an hour and then spit it out. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is made firm, and the softened gum restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or wind, and medicines are not effective, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: 
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow and place the end in an iron or silver spoon; 
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent peg, soak it in boiling butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down. 
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that soaking wool and cotton in cold butter and placing it on the aching tooth, and then putting a hot iron on it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.  
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries with fire are such that you take a piece of iron or wood, and it is thick so the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;  
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	Afterward heat the cautery, from which the shape will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; 
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then refresh it further; 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of any shape that you wish, and according to what you have power;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the shape of the cane:  
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and does not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery head with which the following form will come, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.  
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. 
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it thus for three days. 
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And place softened cotton soaked in butter on top until the burn is gone.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the body and also when it arises from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged by dissolving medicines. 
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go near the throat, and only burn where the heart is but it's a prick. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you apply the other cautery at the juncture of the neck and head of the spine, and it is the cautery which is called "clavile" as we have the form in front. 
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the place as we have said before until it is healed. 
de la toust	From the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and illness of the porcupine is from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor thirst, and the illness is old, then you make two cauteries on the thigh in their hollows.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And the other cautery place it between the two nipples. 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that has been said before.  
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with the whole cautery which is called "point," whose form is shown above in the illness of the ears; 
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points be up to XXX, or thereabouts. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be three fingers long according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because of this, the cauteries are lighter, for you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then it is necessary that you first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards have the patient lie on his back and on his side; 
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	afterwards lift the heart that is within the nipple with the two fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two nerves so that it is in this form: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart until you pierce it as far as the side, and the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries would come; 
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, it is done with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cautery is six cauteries; 
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery that has III nerves: 
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is it applied upon this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the cautery with bristles ground with rope; 
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after make the patient rest and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted. 
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach so that it is drawn out of its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and accustomed cures are used and they do not profit, then it behoves that the patient be turned onto his back, and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the quantity of a penny, to all the cautery pointed, and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and has a half space between one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will rot; 
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauteries be so perfect that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:  
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; 
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And he who will fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach in one place according to the quantity that you see fitting; 
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "points." 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we have had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities; 
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	And the patient is cured of this as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is fitting that the patient be raised up on his backside; 
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypocondria, where the sides of the stomach come; 
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be a space between each cautery the thickness of a fingernail. 
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries; 
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And only half of the heart should be burned, and let the patient stand upright on their feet; 
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if they cannot, let them lie down, extend their legs, and lift their arms;  
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, you can cauterize these cauteries with a knife blade, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole heart, for you would dry up the whole body; 
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not reach the bowels, for the heart is very delicate in that area, and you will know by seeing. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: 
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; 
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, he feels very sharp pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment requires purging, it is necessary that the patient be shaved on his head; 
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat a cautery that resembles a ray, of which this is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and comes to a boil, as long as the pus is all drained out; 
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure according to the cure for abscesses until he is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not fitting that anyone should use this cautery except those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured many times. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly work, and all the same it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must make cauteries from the roots of aristoloche, and in this manner: 
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristoloche long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; 
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And steep it in oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the collarbone and the shoulder, and two small cauteries a bit lower in the part that is below the beard; 
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping back a bit; 
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery under the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two others on each side of the breast behind the cautery that is between the two shoulders; 
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand at all, but make it open as when smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients said that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; 
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and the pain jumps, as we have said in the liver abscess.  
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse according to the divisions of the cures that we have said, and it does not profit, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which there is a way so that you make III cauteries, or IV, in a line according to the length of the mole, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before; 
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand at all on the whole cautery, and let the patient often turn onto their back;  
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder;  
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is placed near the mouse, where the pains of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevation from which you lift the heart be according to the length of the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Then he puts in the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and thus he will have four. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, that cauterizing with all the cautery has three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has had decay for a long time, this is worth more than the other cures previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes."
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it is fitting that you make four cauteries around the shoulder, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; 
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cautery be very close to the thick of the heart 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Then leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to prevent rot, and do not let the wound of the patient heal after the cautery; 
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.  
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one that we have shown before; 
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and the ones for the back are olive-shaped, as it has been put forward before.  
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsy and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; 
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.  
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with the point, lest you burn the yellow wax, and let the cautery be of this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife; 
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; 
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the cauteries exposed for a long time without cleaning, so that it dries up; 
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of the other treatments that we have mentioned. 
de la menoison	From the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by any manner of treatments; 
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong greenness, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery or the circular cautery; 
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four cauteries around the elbow, subtle to all one cautery clave subtle, and two cauteries on the thighs. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then cauterize him on the shoulder, and cauterize each vein, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or several, and they are old and consist of large cold and wet corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries. 
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three on the spine of the back, those which are all beneath the scapula bit by bit in a triangle shape, and one cautery beneath the elbow two times.  
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cold and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one large cautery on the stomach as it is previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the subtle cauteries. 
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain open for a long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the place so that it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you apply the cautery, heat it until it resembles a razor, and then place it glowing hot on the cauterized area. 
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And leave it there long enough so that both your hand and the cautery reach the beginning of the vein, where the blood will be cut.  
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of cauterization to be done, cauterize each one as we have said. 
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the cure of eye ailments, take advantage while they are healthy.  
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on a sore, it will be of greater help. 
de plaie mal curee	from a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or incision, which we will describe in their place, then comes a certain illness that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any fistula comes, and is old and has putrid decay and corrupt moisture, you must test its depth with a subtle probe, and make sure that you know the total depth of the probe.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery until it resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount the pus has entered, and repeat the cauterization as many times as it takes for the dead and corrupted flesh to be burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount needed.  
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestines, beware of these places, and do not make this fire except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not dangerous; 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After healing the place until it is healed, and if the place is cleansed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; 
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not removed, know that the place is infected, and it corrupts the bones at the bottom; 
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and as one of these that we will say in its place.  
de la maladie des reins	Of the sickness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the limbs, and from great windiness, and does not take pleasure in a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the limbs on one side and the other with the pointed cautery that we have said before; 
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater help. 
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and there are right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the nail of a finger. 
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them.  
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously mentioned. 
de la marris	of the sea
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception at all, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain. 
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the shoulder, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back. 
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauteries be sharpened, as we have said. 
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous humors descend to the hip socket and for this reason it moves out of place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together. 
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And the place of the two parts is found, if it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip socket with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the socket as it returns so that the socket is inside the circle. 
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And let the cautery be such as those with which we have cauterized the stomach. 
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present to you, make three large olive wood cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the hearts. 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cauterize until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the hip bone, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is worthless, and the illness is old: 
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills or other good-seeming pills. 
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterward, cauterize them;  
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: 
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together burning medicines and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are like this: 
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	That you cauterize on the hip bone III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large, and have between each cautery space the thickness of a penny, and let the cauteries be olive-colored; 
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Once done, one cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have previously said in the dislocation of the hip; 
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make in half a manner so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the kinds of bone are burned.  
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make II cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds him, and I cautery above the ankle IIII pennies, on the left side a peck; 
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cautery blade be sharp, and burn the thickness of a heart. 
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near it, then cauterize him where he feels the pain three or four times with a cautery called "points". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he knows that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then cauterize it with a blade-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave the cautery long enough to burn the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient greater pain and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly from which he had death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise say of cautery of the hip, which is as follows: make a tool like a nail, as thick as a doctor's thumbnail or a little less, and with spaces between them, from one space to another the width of a thumb knot. 
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the handles be opposite each other on two sides, and also shaped like ours, and it shall have one iron handle well made. 
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and turn it on the healthy side. 
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let the cautery be done once the cautery iron is red hot and leave it for three days.  
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	And then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time.  
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment with anointing until it is healed. 
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its appearance, and few are seen to use it. 
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless it is one of the good cauteries, which he who can endure it, and where it applies itself
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning medical cauteries are such that you make the instrument with spaces in which the edge of the door descends, and it is made of bronze or iron with a long side, and at its height there are two grooves, and between each one there is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; 
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And they are open above and below, and they join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Afterward, put the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and press your hand very hard on the box of the hip; 
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then put between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated in the fire for a moment, and leave it there for an hour or so, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it brings a bite as well as fire; 
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with warm water, and leave it like that for three days, and put butter on it until what is black from the burn is removed 
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three days so that decay is drawn out 
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that has warm water according to what you did on the hip similarly;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the way of warm water, and I have written it or treated it in the treatise of the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot coals, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening where the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put then that pot or another pot well-sealed, and put alkali and lime and soft ash on top, as long as there is one to two finger widths of powder so you will have it well prepared in your hand. 
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it like that until the ash descends and gathers or in a sealed pot, then take all that ash and pour it on lime and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very caustic and is administered in many medicinal works and for cauterizing other members.  
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does the work like fire, and with other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus as turpentine and honey of Anacardia and lime with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and praised it greatly, and said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches it here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in this way that you take two parts of green vitriol fresh and dry, and grind it very much with a bit of fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and bind it; 
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And let him leave it for three hours, so that the patient no longer feels the burn. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put it in a bath as long as his body is warmed up a bit, and put it in bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of humors.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat droppings, it helps a lot. 
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And it must be done in two ways. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the joint that is between the thumb and the finger which is called the knuckle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Afterward, take dried goat droppings and ignite them until they are charcoal, then put them on wool and leave them until they are extinguished. 
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do it again in the same way and do not stop doing so until you think by feeling that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased. 
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cauterization is called "goat dropping cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by similar spread of cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cautery except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is fitting afterwards that the patient be purged with fetid pills or other similar ones, which are applied to his back, where the pain lies, three lines marked in an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points"; 
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see fit, make III or IV cauteries with a medium-sized clavichord cautery according to this form: 
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight anal sphincter when they get up, and fear; 
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find in the last vertebra of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other vertebrae.  
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cleansed, if you cauterize it with a cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery evenly scorches each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, that you cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making II or III lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not apply cautery in any gibbosity that is in a space of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pains are from moisture that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the laity properly call "gout", and when it is of a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cautery in this manner: 
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary for you to grasp the face of the foot, if you do cautery on all the cautery that we call "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, make cauteries on each knee three or four on each side, all olive-shaped.  
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand still except until the thickness of a grain of wheat is burned.  
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knees and back, apply the cautery as we have described in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines long; 
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and give good care to the patient and take medicine. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of a broken bone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is recent, it is fitting that when you see him cleaned, he does not eat anything that day.  
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And let him use things that loosen the belly so that the phlegm descends from his belly; 
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are being repaired, and reset them at your will, and press down below the rupture onto the bone of the hip, and make a sign like half a circle above the body; 
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it oozes pus
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels in their place. 
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And have the assistant hold his hand so they do not return.  
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well on the patient's thighs, and put a cushion beneath him and a sergeant upon his thighs, and another upon his foot who will hold his hands; 
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery upon the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you come to the bone; 
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful that the pus does not flow out when you make the cautery; 
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;  
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this the patient does not die, or other evils. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is fitting that the cauteries for children be small according to their size, and those for large people also large according to their size; 
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed;  
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the treatment of other wounds until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days so that the wound heals well; 
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not protrude when he will get up to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for forty other days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And have good rest, so that he does not work much and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against excessive shouting; 
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows these instructions he will be completely healed. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When tumors come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery with a cautery iron according to its size, and burn one-third of the tumor; 
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said 
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first sign the place of incision and make a line across its width above the fracture, and another behind it, and hold your hand steady with all the cautery heated.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; 
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if not, begin another cautery upon the first, for such custom is that it should turn to the limb which is nearest, for which it behooves you to make the cauteries until the patient is healed.  
de meselerie	Of a wound
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The cautery is helped sometimes by great aid, and the same disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see it cauterized, take care if the ailment is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries upon the head: 
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I apply one hand to the nape of the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. 
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And with two hands on the temples, one behind on the shoulder blade. 
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And I leave my hand until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the crusts come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape. 
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And I cauterize on the thigh according to what is in front.  
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the inflammation is scattered everywhere; 
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And it is clearly losing, then you must cauterize with the cauteries we have mentioned on the head and one on the nape of the neck and two on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby and two on the shoulders. 
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and on the elbows, and on the tendons of the foot, and on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; 
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the sole of the heel, lest you burn them; 
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when you do more cauteries, you do more good, and increase the benefit; 
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already all corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; 
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be a point inserted into the thickness of the flesh. 
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And one sometimes makes a cautery with the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus it is removed. 
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And in all ways let no one interfere unless they are knowledgeable of the limbs and the issues of the nerves that move the body. 
de albaras	From alabaster
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the ailment which is called “albaras” has grown old, and the remedies of medicine are worthless, then cauterize a point with a cautery, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, so that the paleness is removed and its color changes. 
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat it with flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of a dove and blood of an almond, of each one part. 
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be mixed all together, and let it be tied with a cloth, and let it air in the place until it is healed 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of ulcers by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears, and you see it stopping, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nevertheless the wise say that one should also do cautery in the middle of the ulcer; 
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times; 
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and what is more right is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called a "circle," as we have said in our discussion of cauteries.  
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness that is called "adubelati," and it lingers because of the superfluity that it causes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; 
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you will see hasten to die 
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then the cautery surrounds it with many small burns by pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards, he leaves it like that. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce all the way through with the cautery, heat the cautery so that it is this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it behind in some way so that the course of the rot is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a wasting away of the limbs, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry twigs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what suits the place where the illness is; 
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards, cauterize on all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply cauterized softened wool with oil on top until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the healing of wounds generating flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see healthy flesh does not grow, it's good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then start the cautery again on what remains corrupted. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this ailment has sometimes been cured with medicinal water instead of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for the ague in the division: 
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the leeches which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that at the feet through fire a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding and is a large thing lacking which bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this illness are according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot iron cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron as much as a raven's feather, and it should be made of good iron to the extent that it can burn the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges; 
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it like that for III days until it begins to rot. 
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place of ointment spreading charcoal until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by fire the body, and often occurs in hands and feet, it is fitting that you administer a hot cautery. 
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done in this manner: 
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a cane of iron or a feather quill, and put it on the nail and the heel, that is to say for warts. 
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And put the cane on so that it surrounds all around, then put a piece of hot coal, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot coal deep down to the root. 
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And let the patient suffer a bite from the hot coal for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like that, and it will uproot itself by all its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do one after another, until you have pulled out all those that are in the body, then heal the inflammations which breed flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold of nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. 
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-wood cautery.  
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	This will leave the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold illness. 
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes ulcers appear on the body, or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	It is fitting at first, when they appear, that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule:  
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery from myrtle wood, with which the point is grasped in fire, or of a long aristolochia root, or to a lentil-shaped cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And one cauterizes them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are broken down from the superfluity whence they come, and are healed. 
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the forefront, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things. 
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is a very grievous thing to staunch. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is quieted under your finger, and no drop issues anymore. 
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put to the fire olive-wood cautery irons, small and large, until they are all red-hot;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is severed, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is restrained.  
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your hand from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to do one after the other until the blood is drained. 
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient. 
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows freely from the artery, it cannot be well cauterized, especially when the artery is large, unless it is done in one of the four ways we have described. 
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong ligature of thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to staunch blood. 
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be bound and tightly restrained. 
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will apply ligatures tightly with bandages or put burning things on it, or other similar things, it will not be profitable and will do harm.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is staunched both on the wound and on the vein. 
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move the joint, but moisten it with cold water as often as possible until the blood is frozen and thickened and rested. 
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make incisions ahead of those for which he needs to cauterize and use medicine. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures of the side
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the incisions, their causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries. 
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have put this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one can more easily find what one wants. 
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this one, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first one of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, and many die. 
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	There are some who become so distressed by their illness that they die easily because of the intensity they feel from their illness and its severity. 
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And one must fear these things.  
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are some who give you their sense and say: 
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am cured." 
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the illness is treacherous.  
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you in this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely with those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take oaths. 
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognosis and indications in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long remembrance. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	And I have ordered this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to what it is before this chapter of cauteries, that I have divided from the head to the feet so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	sharp head full of pain
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too forcefully.  
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it comes from a cause unknown. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this ailment in anyone but children, and in all those I have seen, death quickly followed.  
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And therefore it seems to me that it is better for me to leave this work to those who can cure it. 
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulder was filled with pain, and whose head grew larger each day until it could no longer support it. 
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered below the bone on top of the scapula, between the heart and the bone.  
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and if the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should cleave a wide slit between them. 
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, so long as the moisture runs; 
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see this form of the spatulate instrument:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is thicker and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that the corners of the head are open on each side, and the sharp point springs back when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not answer to you: 
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then you must cleave three slits between the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After extracting the slits with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil and leave them so until the fifth day; 
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then loosen it and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head be extracted evenly, and have the patient eat dry meat free of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another manner of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point. 
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For it is not always in front.  
aucune fois derrier;	Sometimes behind. 
aucune fois en destre;	Sometimes to the right. 
et aucune fois en senestre.	And sometimes to the left.  
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore make the incision where the abscess appears, and according to the gathering of the point, and let the cut be according to your power. 
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	And beware that you do not cut an artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	And let it flow blood so that the patient does not die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or breasts, and the illness is old, and medicine does not help at all, then the last resort is cautery with which one sears the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore it is fitting, when you see them cut, that the patient puts his head back. 
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	Afterward rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then draw the patient's neck tight with the whole cloth. 
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and its strands from one and the other are after the ears, and they are filled. 
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the strands of its edge, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, as far as the vein reaches the bone, and this be by the wide space of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it should through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear to the touch, it is fitting that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then sign its edge and cut as far as the bone; 
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the quantity of blood that it is fitting to let out is six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery; 
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound: 
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone pointed with pus, cut it so that no abscess follows, then dress the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	from emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes and acute catarrh, due to moisture from tears and the heat in the temples, and old head pain and similar things, and it is treated by medicinal remedies and all that does not profit him, then we should extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the way to extract them is such that the patient makes a raised area behind the hairs of his temples, and listen for the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little filled except in some men who are too cold; 
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is full, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and raise the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; 
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the speculum of which this is the form: 
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the skin slightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side; 
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two cheeks. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not copied, so will it not jump at all without doubt altogether.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw blood for six ounces, down to three. 
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows. 
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut away the excess between the two ligatures at that very hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a blade cautery down to the bone so that the flesh is severed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the gentler operation if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a warm complexion.  
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cautery helps to end moisture: 
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for this reason it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	When it is fitting for the extraction of arteries that one fill the area with old cotton and put well-made tents on top; 
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are unbound, let them be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth, and bandages, until it is healed. 
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the artery is cut as much as you work on it, hurry to cauterize it, or apply vitriol to the spot and press it with your hand until the bleeding stops. 
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you don't have this, place your thumb on the spot until the bleeding stops, then apply something very cold to the area until the bleeding ceases, and it is removed as needed. 
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And the best and easiest way to remove an artery is to cauterize the vein with a two-part trenching cautery, but make sure the trenches are well spaced to retain heat longer. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be a thumb's width of space between the two knives. Then, when you have marked both spots, place the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be spaced between the two heads for it is not soldered by this cautery at all. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery: 
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the temple of the head, and no remedy of medicine profits him, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and feel his forehead swelling as if trembling; 
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if the areas are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is shed, and the papers are scorched, and parched by the heat of the tears, then this remedy is needed. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "the bruised cure," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make him three cuts on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be as it should be all along the forehead down to the nape, and the others as it does to the ribs above the papers, and beware of cutting the arteries which are at the sides above the papers; 
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be three finger-breadths wide across. 
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping away the blood, then put the spatula sharp on two sides as follows: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is behind the temple to the second incision. 
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape away all the flesh which is between the two incisions down to all the fascia which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.  
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first fissure, which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp side towards the flesh burned at the heart, and the dull side toward the bone, and push until it comes to the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to those until the incision is continuous up to those which appear at the heart, and then likewise make in the middle a split up to the other side. 
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken. 
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put over cloths moistened in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that no abscesses come there.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day untie the ligature, and he applies a large poultice of hot chamomile, then the cure of oil with rose oil, and other cures for which one cures wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	where rheumatism of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone has acute catarrh accustomed, and you see those dim and small, and weaken the sight, and the papers burned;  
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs stand on end, and when the head is cut off it gives sharp pain, and the patient sneezes. 
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then know by these signs that those substances and phlegm only come from many veins, and the best cure for it is this. 
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And command the patient to hold his forehead, then make a large incision between the eyebrows, and another two fingers wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin at the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; 
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move when chewing; 
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two edges of the fissure some old cotton, and linen bandages; 
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind cloths moistened in wine and oil on top, and beware of a hot abscess; 
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you must rub the bone until fresh flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote flesh growth. 
En teil maniere:	In this manner: 
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster.  
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And administer it to these wounds to encourage flesh to grow all over. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Anything that aches in the ears is one of four things: 
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	either grain, or beast, or stone from a mine or similar thing like iron.  
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils 
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing thing such as water and easily similar things.  
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or something else that doesn't fit in the ear lodges there, and it doesn't grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then apply a drop of oil of violets or oil of sesame, and then proceed to extract it. 
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make him sneeze by a certain method, and pinch his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear above. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times this cure comes by force. 
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come by force, administer extraction with subtle pincers, of which this is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out by force with the pincers, that's good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, administer extraction with a subtle awl of small double-edge. 
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not jump out by that, make a needle of iron and push the point of the needle or the hole of the ear strongly, and fill what is around the needle with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the needle.  
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it by force, because many times it comes by force as we have said. 
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come by force in any manner, take glue like that which is used for birds, and put into some instrument which is suitable for doing this, and put a piece of cotton around. 
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the buttock onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw forth force. 
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear just as a hot abscess may vein and spasm; 
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient faint from cephalic bloodletting and extract some blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, making a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends;  
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then suck out the pus according to your ability, and quickly suck it into your mouth; 
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for it until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction. 
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, subtle spatula according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is damp from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it. 
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute pain then when the jaw is inflamed in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a sneezing of condition first and amples the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps further than that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; 
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place the patient's ear on one or two stones and press upon it with your feet on the other side, and strike another stone upon the stone that is in the ear. 
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop doing this stone on stone until the sharpness has completely gone out, and thus it will all go out. 
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see it, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and hold the other head over fire until the strongest joint is burned. 
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then make another part of other joints until the sharpness has completely gone out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of a beast, if it is small-bodied, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division. 
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, use extraction with pincers.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are any worms, take them out with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the cane whose shape is this: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	Insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then suck up the whole cane. 
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, plug around the cane with cotton as I said for the stone; 
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven for the killing of worms, and you will find them or their treatment in distillations.  
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, of which this is the shape as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or of iron, three holes are made below for small openings, and above ones for distillation. 
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press the distillation inside, an iron instrument is well made for this, and if you see it take the razor and wrap cotton around the point. 
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then put your oil or juice in it, and whatever medicine you see fit in the cane, and the cane is in the ear. 
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then insert the razor into all the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or reaches the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be somewhat heated over the fire so that it can be distilled into the ear. 
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.  
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; 
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens to men by rupture of a wound, or by a splinter lodged in the ear, and this rupture sometimes comes completely within the ear, so that one cannot see it; 
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes there is a small fire from the hole, and one sees it well. 
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which then comes completely within, if one cannot see it, is a hidden ailment in various positions, and in this case it behooves you to place the patient's ear in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside: 
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see an apparent opening, if the work has always this speculum of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not crush the ear; 
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the splinter is of flesh or from the earlobe, then hold it with fine pincers and remove it lightly until the whole piece is taken out. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is perfect in the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it a little in the fire, then put it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the splinter which causes pain to the ear, pierce lightly and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.  
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for as many days until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder over crushed vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear is swollen, it is necessary that you remove the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerate which is made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed.  
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for it until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, immerse a sponge and cloths in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This remedy which comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is fitting that you extend them with forceps and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put on the place powdered vitriol.  
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without it coming off, then cauterize gently with a lentil-shaped cautery, and cauterize after the incision becomes numb. 
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times repair, so that nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are destroyed and do not return.  
de la gresle	From gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem rough in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hail", and it is a collection of moisture thick in the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such: 
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the hail moves from one side to the other, and it is an easy thing to know; 
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make the bowl quite wide, then lightly scrape each side, then take it with pincers and cut it. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the paper, do not worry about harming the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the split is large, sew it together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; 
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for ointments will soon restore it and bring flesh. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hail is descending inside the ear toward the upper part, turn the paper over and hold the hail with pincers, cut it and press on one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; 
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the hail is cut off, wash the wound with salt water and heal the place of the one who complains of flesh as long as the patient is healed. 
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that gathers in cloths of papers above, and it happens more to children than adults, and it grieves them much in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; 
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep on them, and are their papers under their eyebrows so wet that it swells and the appearance has covered from the exinach which appears in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exirnach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy place; 
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that it contains from each part, then put it on top. 
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your hands on one side and the other so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; 
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit about as wide, and not any larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein; 
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin thoroughly until you reach the exirnach;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in several positions exirnach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat. 
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract it therefore all at once with a piece of cloth pinched between your hands towards the fire, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is scattered. 
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And make sure you do not put anything into the split, unless you reach all the way to the eye, so that you do not blind it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the pus does not open at the beginning of the split, slightly widen the split until it appears. 
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then wet cloths in water and vinegar, and put them on the area, and bind with bandages. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then let the healer apply soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on warts other than those that nature makes and are mature, they harm them and bring about many illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the wart and albugine, so long as it is the cause of the destruction of the wart.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And the cure is according to four ways: 
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before it or the chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your lap, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand. 
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is turned over, it is good.  
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, then if you stick a needle through all of it. 
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let this be near the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it to the razor. 
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, at all the spatula joining, from the large tear to the small one.  
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then extract the thread and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drape, then draw on the paper a figure of an anchor, as the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raising the paper which is divided into all.   
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if one needs to make a large quantity of paper, according to how soft the paper is; 
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make all the spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and begin with large tears up to small ones. 
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs as thick as a root, then put the awl into one of the two angles of the heart, then skin it all. 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then bring the two lips together with a needle stitch using a very fine thread of wool, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess threads on the two eyebrows dry completely without anything sticky, if you see fit to do so. 
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads until three or four days. 
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound without suturing with drying and constricting things, for paper revives at the sewing of the wound and its joining, but the suture is weak (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear. 
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there is another way: 
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you cut the paper into a shape like the leaf of myrtle, as we have said, at III ounces dried according to the form which is here:  
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then bind those who overcome small forces equally according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not equal, take a needle with one thread and put it through the shape. 
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And put one other thread below the large tear, and the second thread below the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally. 
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then smooth your hand equally and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have said, then bring together the two edges of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar soothing ointments. 
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and it sometimes happens that the hair of the paper is converted. 
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the suture in one and the other is more artful. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure of boils is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you convert the paper and put it in according to what I have said, then make 2 boils by art, and 2 subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the width of a span is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and take 2 pieces from where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then join one and the other subtly on what protrudes from the paper of the boil, and strain the 2 boils from the 2 parts they form. 
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it like that for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and heal and bear, as long as it seeks by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, if the sore has some strength, then cure it as much as it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow; 
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work is such that you take a subtle needle, and put a fine and subtle silk thread through it;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the shoulders and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; 
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the chase the other fine silk thread quickly, and knot the two threads together; 
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient’s head on your knee; 
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be beneath the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and delicate operation, then push the needle all the way in at the root of the hair nearest the joint, and make it pierce quickly through the skin as you draw it along the natural hair. 
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the joint, and push that hair into the joint, if there is one or two or three or more. 
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out all the way at the joint through the skin with the natural hair.  
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the joint is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the joint down along the thread that you have ordered, until the joint comes out through the opening above, and you see it with the sight of your eye. 
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then if you treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh rises over it. 
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a horse's mane with it, and let it grow with the one you are letting it grow with, until it is long enough and then remove it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rotting of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this ailment which is called "aleacratio" or putrefaction comes into the eye, there are two ways: 
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.  
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs through the cutting of a wound, or by incision or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to treat it is that you split open that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put linen threads inside, and bind it until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not fitting that you use anything in its treatment that dries or constricts.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first. 
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	But work with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and roses of water or elder and flaxseed are cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in some oils, and he wraps a tent, and cures it with this.  
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not fuse according to the form it was before. 
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And this work that we have said is nothing other than the direction of this illness, so that it does not return according to the form it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness which is below, which truly is called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauteries and similar things; 
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of working on it is that you take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct as far as the right so that the thread comes out in two sides of the flesh.  
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then place the flesh above all the needle, and the cup at the spatulas width. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is needed, it is good; 
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take the razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two fissures on either side inside the paper. 
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the heads of the two fissures be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the name "Greek I"; 
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are below, from what is beneath the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; 
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the cure that we have said of softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.  
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the ailment comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it is fitting that you cleave a full fissure beneath the hairs of the skin, and according to what is aforementioned; 
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; 
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must do the work according to the form of the ailment, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare all manner of things so that they may make the figure return to its natural form; 
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patients themselves, according to what is fitting of work and instruments are in several dispositions.  
dou soudement de la papiere	with the pounding of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the skin above is joined with the white of an egg and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is fitting that you put the point of a razor beneath the skin, and lift it up;  
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and hold them with pincers, as long as you cut what is exposed with a delicate spatula, which is not too sharp nor too dull, so that the patient can endure that the spatula is not too sharp and does not blind the eye; 
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and your incision, with which you remove the assembled skin, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; 
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all that is assembled is cleansed, and do nothing at all in the sharp salty eye, and lift it with sweet water, and with coriander; 
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool softened in plenty of egg; 
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day use sweet coriander and other southern things as long as it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that a nail is according to two manners: 
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and seems like hard fat, and another which is not nervous but seems like white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and thinks to pinch it, one cannot. 
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And the one and the other resemblance begins toward the great tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all the vision and all the light and the movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is such that the patient puts his head in a sound place, then he opens his eyes. 
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And lift the paper to your hand, then with the point like small pincers, and extend it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle and put horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair in it, and strong thread. 
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	And double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the angle, and pierce it with the whole needle, and tie the angle with thread and extend it above, and flay all the hair on the side of the angle which follows the prune and silk to the hair as far as the head, then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a very fine spatula and with small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tear duct, so that by the incision the body does not usually shed tears. 
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes they are placed on the oncion alone, and on the thread as we have said; 
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the skin is scraped off all over so that it resembles this form: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the plumule is not pierced; 
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	And after the incision, a piece of silk thread is placed in the eye, and a collar made of pewter, and it is left until the next day; 
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer does what is necessary until it is healed.  
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot insert the needle, and the oncion cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines; 
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and it grows as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the eye of the patient, and take a light sharp spatula according to this form: 
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the splinter subtly, and if you see that it diminishes nothing and the reason hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead, and only grind it, and plug the eye until the next day; 
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing else is against it in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it and first heal the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh or tears harms the eye too much, suspend it to the eyelid, and cover one part and not all, so that no body of tears comes in. 
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge. 
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men, red flesh is never born, and covers the prunes and holds them on papers and turns them to the fire, and looks like a rose of baluster.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the works are such that the patient puts their head in his healthy side, then he operates them, and all those who have suitable instruments for this, and support with strength; 
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then take the first instrument, and go shaving all the way to the end with the razor, and be careful not to blink at the work; 
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be made in two places as we have said in the incision of the finger and with small forces, which remove the sebum, as the shape after this chapter demonstrates. 
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress, broiled, or you can distill red sulfur, and similar corrosive medicines, and put hot oil with a cotton swab soaked in egg white so that it is assured of a hot abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains there, and the shoe presses upon it, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess. 
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as many charts are added to the eye in this manner. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you relieve the treatment of each weak eye from the natural path;  
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental path, in work with iron; 
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member suffers from this work.  
des voines des eulz	of veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red ones that are covered on top of the eye, and endure in sight their work and weaken the eye all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, it is necessary first that you look to see if the eye is strong or weak, and there is no other illness except for pain. 
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then the boil in a twofold manner:  
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to his wisdom, and let the ounces be subtle doubled according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be applied by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then one coils as forcefully those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after hour, as long as you see those veins move away from the eye; 
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins; 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, if you distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains beneath the eyelid. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and you are sure of a warm abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until he is healed; 
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of force: 
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The one named "arissati" makes a fistula.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it by cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess where it should drain, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed. 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments with which its form is:  
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called "sharp chief" and is made of hard iron at the head end and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form: 
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it upon the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know that corruption is removed.  
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines. 
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound is soldered and flesh grows, and the body of the gut is soldered and remains so for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accidents occur, know that it is healed; 
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this is not the case, if there is nothing else to do but bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this method: 
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone the second time with an iron instrument and with sharp medicines; and when it is uncovered, take the drill according to this method, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and let the drill be thinned down to its point as you see here: 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye a finger's breadth, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and let the patient feel this because the vein will begin to flow if he holds his hand under his nose; 
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the place, the matter goes to the snow. 
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	This is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye opens completely and there is no disturbance in vision, nor any dimming, it is fitting that you bandage the patient; 
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the healthy eye, then apply cupping glasses or a cautery without piercing to suck out [the humor], then put on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and the plaster on top of bandages and cloths; 
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the cloths is such that you take cloths soft enough, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs. 
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then it is strained with a hard bandage, and begin again with cupping glasses to suck without wounding. 
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then you must strain it more. 
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the ligature after a day and night, and if you see the oil return, that is good. 
se ce non;	If not; 
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	begin again the plaster and the cloths and the ligature and the cupping glasses until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	For a rupture of cloth with a warp
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes to the woven cloth, then open it, and there will come forth shavings like grains of resin, and it is wondrous to behold. 
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then put in another needle where it has a doubled thread from the tear duct.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; 
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then take the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the eye around it, and pull it well, then remove the needle and place a softened linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white on top; 
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the threads adhere with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; 
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and once the wound is restrained by the eye on each side of a cloth circle, until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye has a large appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes perfectly from the eye, correct the white moisture and reduce the eye, and it will enter quickly; 
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed. 
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowel of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a bowel assembled in the eye, resembling descending fire, and this is not fire; 
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of appearing in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so much as you see the bowel come up above your eyes; 
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and not descend, and let the light be removed, and let the patient see things as he used to; 
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is fire, and if the descending of the bowel is not as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and put it on the horny coat in one spot along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny coat and the corona, so much as the bowel rises;  
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is issued, if you distill in the sharp oil hot mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	sharp objects of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the likenesses of the sharp ones in the division, and what it befits for piercing; 
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It befits that you make the sick one sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and bind the sound eye tight very strongly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; 
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right; 
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument below the cornea by the thickness of a reed in that part of the eye where there are fewer tears, then insert the instrument which is called "almagda" carefully and twist your hand until it pierces the cornea and you feel the almagda reach the empty space. 
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda passage be equal to the measure from the pupil to the end of the blackness.  
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the cornea of the eye. 
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone through that paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, then put the instrument all the way to where the point is and then press it down one path after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the point is now lowered, let the patient see it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	Afterwards rest a little, and if the point goes back up the second path, put force on it with the instrument and when it is well fixed and it does not rise, carefully withdraw the almagda by turning your hand bit by bit. 
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then put again a sharp point of a needle gem, and lift out the oil from within it. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or linen softened in plenty of egg yolk and bind with good oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on a common poultice with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyelids too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit," of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle place, then put in almond, as we have said; 
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And for the completion of the work prepare the patient with a coming doctor, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; 
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And let him be devoid of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition until the third day; 
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then untie him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then tie him again until the seventh day; 
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it does not suit you to do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it suits you to delay this, because the sharp point rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When an abscess comes, untie the oil before the seventh day, and dress it with what relieves abscesses. 
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is soothed, untie the bandage and put on its face a little gold leaf to cover it for a day, and let it be then in that dark room. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then go out of the house little by little, and convert yourself to your ways;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that no disciples should interfere in this matter. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in some parts they made a kind of almond paste, which caused a sharp pain, but even so I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing. 
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almsgiving, so that those who do not know them see them; 
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be of proper iron: 
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of these same instruments be of such subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh out of the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there are born or made various joined chariots, from which there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; 
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such that have a chariot enchanted with a fox color, and if a chariot of good bone color.  
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case then of these chariots which is of good bone and not enchanted, it behooves you to make the sick person sit between your hands against the sun; 
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open their nostrils, and throw the ointment on those chariots, and draw them forth;  
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	for hold it so that you can sustain it with a subtle pointed spatula on one side, as long as you know that the chariot is entirely removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be grasped, carefully work it out with all the fine instruments so that nothing remains. 
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if there is swelling or a pustule appears, cut it as appropriate;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant pustules, hurry and cauterize them until the swelling subsides and all the matter is removed, then pour wine or vinegar gently on them. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If vinegar works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is cured.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is matter lodged in the bone above which instruments cannot reach to cut. 
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen, rather thick, knotted by hand, and leave a space of a finger or less between each knot.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's shoulder on a thread in its nest at the bottom of the armpit, and draw it in smelling as long as it comes through the nose into the mouth; 
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times they do this to the child like schools, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it;  
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other as we are on the thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the new ones have corrupted the flesh, then draw the thread, wipe away the blood, and wet the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back to the nest as before; 
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode everything that remains of the flesh;  
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put or place a splint of plank for some days until he is healed, and if he needs drying medications, use them. 
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, in which one distills the oils and medicines or places them: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is of silver or of iron, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and it conducts also. 
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be filled to purge the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it has a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid. 
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh out of the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease called "telul" is born on the head, grows and becomes very large, so that it is dreadful to behold. 
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all the bone, then place a cautery or burning medicine on top. 
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is delayed being covered until it becomes large, then beware if it is hard, of dark red color, with poor sensation. 
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	Do not touch it with iron for it is an inflamed abscess, for when one covers it even once, great harm comes to the patient.  
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dark red color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and treat the area with drying and astringent things. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilaginous operations, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding freely; 
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then join the two edges with stitches, and then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their core until they bleed, then join the two edges with stitches, and remove them, and sprinkle powder made from dragon's blood and ground incense. 
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or other soldering plaster and leave it until it heals then cure it with anointing until it is healed 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way to suture is that you bring together the solution: 
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	either with needles as we have said in suturing the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread as I have shown you. 
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In the hands sometimes appears within the lips of an abscess hard, resembling grains of millet, small and large;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn back the lips and split open each knot and take them with pincers and cut them in each part
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply oil after the incision of ground glass, until the blood is stopped. 
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then wash with vinegar and treat the area with dry things until it is healed. 
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times flesh boils arise on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; 
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	It is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run out; 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put powdered vitriol on the spot, or other restraining and drying powders; 
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it: 
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the shapes of the instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes rough and ugly scurf assembles at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, 
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and wormy, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your lap, and raise the bones or the bark which appear, as long as nothing remains; 
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And then make black and green, and yellow and the other stains, as long as they are cleansed;  
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if you remove that which is at the first reason, it is good; 
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, start again on the second and third day, until you have raised everything;  
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that the teeth need various forms of instruments to raise them, according to what the work shows, because the rasp with which one raises the front teeth has other shapes than those with which one raises between the teeth; 
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others should be prepared for you. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is fitting when you cure a tooth for its pain that you delay as long as you can, for this ought not to be done.  
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for the removal. 
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to draw, it is fitting that you are certain of the tooth pulling.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks that it is a holy tooth, and causes the good tooth to be removed. 
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And nevertheless the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the bad one remains, for we have already wanted to do this at these sanctuaries.  
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is fitting that you scrape around the tooth entirely, and cut deeply to keep the gum from all sides. 
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then move it to your two hands or with delicate forceps at the first pinch and pinch, so that it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the forceps. 
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient rest upon your thigh between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, and move it as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the bone is pierced and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the holes are; 
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracting; 
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and the patient suffers greater pain from the root's malice than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not do as the ignorant barbers do, who by their haste and boldness often break the carriage, and do not apply what we have recounted; 
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they bring about a great illness at times through the roots that remain, or through the carriage that they break, as we have often seen.  
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood runs out, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place. 
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that doesn't work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments with which one first draws teeth should have long points and thick handles so they do not bend when you draw the tooth; 
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large members so that they do not bend in the opposite direction, and made of well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the pieces.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after drawing, it is fitting that you put moistened cotton smeared with butter on the place for a day or two until the flesh softens, then insert the forceps which are called "algefri," whose head resembles a bird's beak; 
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and within they are made like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a small scraper, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps because of this, it is good. 
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the following shapes come: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two arms, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are before in the manner of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large pincers, whose form is this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many instruments are dense.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted. 
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And wise and subtle masters find their own instrument according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of others, so that it does not break the chariot or other bones, or if it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit it, as I told you, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the form: 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone so it does not escape, but can hold and remove it. 
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, remove it with all these instruments.  
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When a tooth appears not according to nature and its form is ugly, especially in young women, you should know if the density is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place and cannot be filed. 
adonques lou raie;	Then remove it.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak and is made of sharpened steel. 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the saw cuts little by little in the hand for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears one can file it, then the file of a part files as here is its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is also like the file with which one makes needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And then file the tooth bit by bit with your hands lightly so that it does not move until it falls out. 
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then smooth the surface at the end with no sharp edge, and if it is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the sharpness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech. 
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When a tooth in front falls out, whether by blow or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without it hurting, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, and that does not work; 
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then it is necessary to restrict it with a thread of gold, because threads of silver turn green and rot, but gold never changes. 
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And the thread should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see that the teeth need to be straightened, take a thread and double it between the two sound teeth, then place the dislocated teeth between the doubled thread so that it comes out cleanly on the other side of the sound tooth. 
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then begin again the covering until the place where you started and pull your hand subtly and carefully so that it does not move. 
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the teeth with the thread using pincers and bring them together and place them between the sound tooth so that it does not bite the tongue; 
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave them tightly bound as long as they can remain so, and if they come undone or the thread breaks, bind them with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it remained and served thus for all its time; and that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and no one should interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone, and puts it in the place where there is a missing tooth, and takes it out as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To loosen the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this frenulum which comes below the tongue by nature, one is born like this;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accidental wound that has healed; 
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and put your hand on their head, and lift the tongue; 
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then cut the nerve ligament widely, as long as the tongue is loosened from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knotting, which comes from a wound, then insert the hook and cut widely that ligament. 
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath.  
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And when you have done so, apply a dressing of rose water and alum, or sharp cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen. 
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And bandage the patient's tongue every night so that the blood cannot coagulate.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this purpose.  
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then the healer continues with other cures until he is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see it become red, black, or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre. 
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is turning white and there is moisture, then cut the skin with a fine scalpel and free it from one side to the other. 
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if the pus does not come to your work, apply ground vitriol until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw out everything completely. 
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the place from dirt and salt, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godaths", and we properly call them the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: 
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron at all. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, also for the drainage of blood. 
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it alone until it is ripe, and then you will cut it open, or it will burst on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of whitish color and the root is delicate, have your instrument ready to cut, but first look to see if the abscess is warm, at rest, and appeased. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their hands in your sight, and open their mouth, taking the instrument between their hands, press the tongue down below the whole instrument, so that its shape is seen. 
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And it should be of silver or fine steel like a knife;
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Press your tongue against all these instruments, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and insert it into the almond, and hold it firmly above more than you can. 
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And draw nothing of the cloths with it, then apply the cup to the instrument, from which this is the shape, that it seems like one force. 
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And all the ways the tips are curved, and one to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel. 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, take tongs, of which this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be cutting on one side, and not on the other. 
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have covered one of the almonds, cover the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, hot and clear, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water, or decoctions of pomegranate rinds are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it until it is healed; 
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And if any other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two tonsils, then treat them as you would the two tonsils. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, namely, a small abscess. 
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it had nearly closed off her entire throat so that the woman could not exhale through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in this state for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that he had to put two reins through the two holes of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened therefore and quickly inserted a lancet into one of them, then drew out the pus, and extracted a large quantity of matter.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I performed the same procedure on the other opening, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue. 
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After you pierce the lancet into these abscesses, and scoop out a part of it, only a little blood should come out. 
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the conduit of the woman's throat was unstopped, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to lance that abscess for a long time. 
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess grew again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large. 
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I ligated it and cauterized it inside her throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Then it stopped growing. 
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.  
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the swelling descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular". 
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is below large and round, it is called "grape." 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cauterized as we have said in the division, and the cautery does not profit, and you see that the boil has been appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it. 
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round assembled and is not long;  
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is of blood or of purple color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger upon the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have made mention before; 
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the lancet into the grape, and draw it below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.  
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut away any more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; 
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cut away more, it grieves the voice and speech;  
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and care for it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of being cut, you should give him something to dull the fear of the cautery.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient put his head in good health, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we have said in the chapter on cautery, and hold it with sharp, hot coals, so that it is not too thick nor too thin;  
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the point of this instrument, which has this shape: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have on the head a hair or where one puts the medicine, such as the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine upon the eye; 
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus run from their mouth into the medicine within so that it does not go down the throat and lungs 
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye, the amount of half an hour, until you see it soften and the stinging of the medicine is soothed; 
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the cotton above, until the cotton is inflamed on the eye;  
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry and take it out after four or five days.  
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery wipe it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine. 
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be treated with sharp cold, and be cured by gargles until it is healed. 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, or the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and wormwood and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put water in it, and let it boil; 
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and within the pot there should be an instrument fitted in this manner: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or iron, and one of the ends should be put into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; 
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards, repeat often until the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, because many things happen; 
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make this fire hotter than the decline of a boil allows. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside the head a crust of egg, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; 
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the crust of egg does not make the steam burden the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else gets stuck in the throat;  
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your might, so that you see the thing move;  
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; 
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	if perhaps it extracts the thing by vomiting; 
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; 
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; 
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, it will air out, and then you will pull hard;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come easily as we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	Let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised up; 
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it suffocate him, and do not push the bone in; 
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument in, so that he knows where the thing is lodged; 
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the bottle is empty, or if it draws the instrument equally strong, until it is strong. 
de la sansue de la gorge	From the bloodletting of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes medicine is without blood, as I have said in the division by the treatment of medicines.  
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when that does not profit, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, and press their tongue to the instrument as I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, cut it with very small forceps or with subtle tongs that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hollow reed, and put it into the throat of the patient, then put the end of the reed on a hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And hold the patient with sharp pain every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full view of sharp cold and work the mouth and swallow it in a sense and move it with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the blood feels the cold it will stop. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not stop as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida at the instrument as I have said in the fumigation of the grape.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without delay. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the way of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are live coals, and it is covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and the head of the instrument is put through that hole. 
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you give the patient the fumigation and they put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close their mouth so that the smoke doesn't escape but comes up to the sinuses; 
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And the sinus will now drain, and if it doesn't, you repeat the fumigation many times; 
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient should endure thirst, and eat salty things and such, and not drink any water; 
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then it will be necessary for it to drain freely by this treatment.  
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinus is, when it can be seen, like curved forceps to be inserted into the throat.  
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it should resemble a soignee beak, and it should have the roughness of a file, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go. 
et vez ci la forme:	And see this shape:  
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many abscesses are similar, according to what memory brings here of one and the other in this book, and they vary in perforation and size. 
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And it is in two ways, one of which is in its own appearance, and from the moisture it holds.  
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those wounds which are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses of fleshy areas are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And abscesses should not be pierced until the swelling is mature according to its fulfillment. 
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and they do not die according to their fulfillment, such as abscesses that are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is rotten around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, by which there is a cause for contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the abscess is near a main limb, and you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the main limb.  
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	if it is located near the foundation, if you pierce it, so be it that he dies; 
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess raw without digestion being completed, except for the one that is located near the foundation, lest it rot completely through and become elongated within, and a fistula arises; 
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and it cannot heal in due time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is fitting that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and that is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; 
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is fitting that you make the perforation where the most dependent part of the abscess is located, and where it appears to move; 
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it be the perforation along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equals where there is no weeping. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the member which is bent.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in fleshy place, it is best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, the venom will spread along the length of the body and is full of much filth. 
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And by chance the lips harden and its depth. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is fitting that you treat small abscesses, small openings;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large openings, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; 
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is fitting to cut out the core, and cover.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become as yellow as draperies, and is dead, then it is fitting to do as one does for buboes: 
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are some that are split into three angles, and if there are some that we cut like the leaf of myrtle, just like abscesses of angers;  
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are some where we make a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that do not have a head, such as a superficial boil, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; 
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary that when the abscess is large, and it has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; 
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then open the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing at random;  
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times gradually, until all the pus is drained; 
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	the same applies if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman bearing [a child], or young children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For sometimes the intestines jump out with the issue of the bowel, and by chance the patient dies, and you do not notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if wipe the wound, and look whether the wound of the abscess is small; 
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a large opening, if apply bandages of linen or fine cotton; 
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that they come against each other; 
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have stitched it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or rasping of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; 
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the bone set, and treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water quickly and easily, wet a cloth, and put it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the discharge of blood persists, apply dressing and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a time of winter, and the flesh or abscess is very nervous, it is necessary that you put on bandages and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; 
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in summer, and the flesh is thick, then you should place wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil or in cold wine and oil on top, until the third day as we have said. 
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then untie the abscess, wipe it and dress it as is appropriate, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this should be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:  
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	As I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, see this chapter. 
des soros	of serums
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When boils appear on the head, they are like little pouches of pus, just as the jeweler's pouch for a ring, and there are many similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and others that have moisture as well as pus; 
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are some that are hard and stony at the waist, there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the waist are such that you prove with all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", of which the form comes hereafter, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, so let it go through above for a long time.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, do not leave any skin that contains that moisture, for it will return immediately if you leave anything. 
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; 
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; 
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And do this as often as needed for a night. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	Then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure that it no longer remains at night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds a lot of fat, then do this according to this form for a long time. 
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And you should rub in ointments and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your healing milk for the boil where it lies. 
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery goes against you, do what I told you afterwards. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same for an abscess if it is ripe, and for the waist and for curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the abscess pierces it and draws out moisture, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and like those were the boils that I cut from an old woman's head. 
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	And I found the boil as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not break.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had cut into it, they would have done just as much harm as cutting into a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or appearing, especially those that come at the head of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the lowest place so that the pus can come out.  
et les cure si com il covient.	And the cure should be done as it is appropriate. 
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come in other parts of the body, and they are very painful, and they are joined together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its own rib, just as the wart and the abscess on the head, as we have said;  
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many resemblances to these scrofula.  
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In that one then which you see of good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves at each point and is not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the duct, and is not deep;  
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	it is fitting that you cut it from above and scrape it at each point, and extend the two lips of the wound to the sutures, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses on the head; 
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and do not let the instrument be too sharp nor cutting, lest the hands slip, and do not press too hard before, lest you cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut a vein or artery and it will not let you work, put powdered vitriol into the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and remove the plague; 
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood has stopped, return to your work until you complete it; 
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then inquire with your index finger whether any small scrofula remain, if so, cut and cleanse them.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if it has a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not fitting that you cut that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself without harm. 
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the wound with old cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.  
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you know how to cut off its root, and draw with force, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofula that hold superfluity, pierce them where it appears dead; 
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it as the one mentioned before, in dependence, then apply bandages with ointment and such things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. 
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleansed, apply a dressing with ointment containing charcoal, until it is healed. 
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their words. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the slit in the throat which is called "epiglottis" be scraped. 
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And one should not do this, for all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the windpipe of the throat, it is fitting to lift the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it below three circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the slit of the face, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those things are suitable for the section of the epiglottis if there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the whole length, then splits the heart as far as it comes to the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut out the bone marrow, as we have said. 
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section through which the phlegm of the chest passes out, and by the defect of the voice. 
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is doubtful, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and sew it all up without touching the cartilage. 
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is all torn open and the patient is judged dead, and the defect is in the pharynx.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut out the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death. 
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, until it was healed. 
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels from her windpipe; 
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood coming from it; although it had not pierced a vein nor gone farther than the throat, the veins were ruptured by the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it only happened to the young woman that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards returned to its normal state; 
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for this reason I say that you should not fear cutting the epiglottis. 
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of yellow, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two ways: 
naturez, et accidens;	Nature and accidents; 
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Or nature has no part. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accidents are according to two manners, one of which resembles fat to us, and the other manner resembles an abscess which comes from our arteries; 
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it is not fitting to work with hot iron except in that which is small, and he tests and searches at all the entrances.  
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as we find our fat, and it cannot go through any vein, then cut it off as we cut off the warts, and treat all its top, if there is any.  
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And surround it well soon, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed. 
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many manners of ours, of which I will say all the resemblances;  
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and therefore it is necessary that I say all the difference which is between us and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that issue is heat and fever lasting, as long as the boilings are passed, and rot is accomplished; 
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then rest the fever and the heat.  
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With new there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains its own juice, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins also as a pea, and grows large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two resemblances, either greasy or moist, and many of the colors are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," according to its shape or chapter which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of the inquisition of abscesses for us is that you take or a more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers, little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then that it be according to the size of the abscess; 
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the instrument, and take care that it does not leap out. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs clear, whatever its color, then do as I have said for the other abscesses; 
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument no moisture comes, know that it is fatty; then do as I have said in a cross shape, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scratch it on each side and guard the garment where it lies so that you draw it clean with the needle.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out clean, then do so in pieces so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if even a small piece remains and it does not bother you, then apply the wound with some corrosive sharp powders, and extract the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what causes flesh to grow. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein beats against you or another thing hastens and apply powdered vitriol, and let it rest for two days or three, as long as the wound ripens, and stills the boiling of blood; 
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to covering what has remained dry. 
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of inserting instruments, and they are of three kinds: 
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: 
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistulas; 
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like needles with which we sew charms, and they are made of citric iron, or of iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are the best, and are more proven for black pitch to surround the curves of a fistula. 
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three kinds:  
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the opening. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the needles are of many resemblances, as you see here: 
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are needles that have two curves in three ways also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are needles that have three curves, and they are also of three ways; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are needles that have two curves, and needles with only one curve, and they are of three ways also; 
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all this is necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is what we make are cutting, and some of them do not cut more than one side, from which we flay the veins, for this we do not cut the vein nor the nerve; 
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these inserters are the alamel replied in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; 
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:  
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them more than in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and at no time do we make another small instrument resembling punches of fists, according to this form, with which we staunch blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back in place so that it heals properly in accordance with the veins and arteries, and never again return to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so much that they resemble women's breasts; 
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to heal them, if it is necessary, should follow the form of these lines b. up to g.: 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine made into a paste, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; 
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs down, and is softened by its size as it happens with women, then make two cuts on it, by two similar incisions;  
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is connected to the other at the end of one and the beginning of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line b. up to line g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then flay the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of bleeding, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton in corrosive ointment. 
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it softens the remaining and fat, then treat it until it is healed.  
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then dress the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, make it as we said for incisions of scrofula, and if the wound closes inwards, apply a cautery as we said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is severed and the skin above it is sewn together, many times abscesses come about, and the same thing happens to a swollen vein and an abscess. 
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if the knower knows when it is for the artery, the abscess is long and perfect. 
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it at your fingertips, if you feel dislocation; 
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, it must be put back in its place.  
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles or neck and many other places, and it is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from an artery making its way through the skin for a long time; 
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate with lancets and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;  
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then put a needle underneath it and make it pierce through to the other side, and remove the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; 
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then press the place between the two strands of a speculum until the pus that is in it comes out, and let the abscess be released. 
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply a bandage that compresses the wound, as long as the ligaments tighten. 
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed. 
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is as large as a vein, it is fitting that you hold in your hand what you can take from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand and make it pierce, and let there be a double thread so that you pull it from the other side;  
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with a ligature from one of the two sides to the two ends of the thread. 
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will come out, put another needle all along the thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four places; 
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the heart and leave that which is tied; 
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a cloth moistened in wine and oil on top of it, then apply dressings of tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, abscesses come to nerves when they are strained, or through too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in the shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and it is a pain of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several positions without pain; 
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is extracted, the patient feels pain, and it is not in perfect position with the body, but under the heart; 
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and move well on all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron. 
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	lest it cause contraction; 
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, if you have some tweezers, and cover it at its root; 
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if you suspend it to the lancet, and flay it, then bone and assemble the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of large ulcers hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere, a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the root is subtle, and the head large; 
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are some small and some very large; 
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two or three things on his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were easily cut open, and moisture constantly flowed from them. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them off and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces. The work of cutting is such that if you look and see that the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has fine roots; 
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the cut is made with a broad spatula, and you have a fire cautery present. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at the waist there often come excessive flows of blood, and if your patient faints, then hasten to cauterize; 
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient fainting and afraid of the incision with iron, then take a good thread of flax, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; 
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to pull the thread of flax until it reaches the joint, and passes through it by its effort. 
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, it is painful to cut them directly through the abdomen, but you can well cut half of them, and then cauterize them so they do not grow back. 
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of a dark color and poor sense and full of milk. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the arm is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a boil comes from cautery of a wound or an incision, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before it, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from a rupture of the intestine and through an opening in the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its hips if it responds, and then returns, and by chance if it is squeezed, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but do not constrain it. 
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity. 
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the healing take place.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold his breath and be stretched out straight, then bind all around the arm.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all of the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to all the great one. 
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind the limb with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the knot be loose. 
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and push your index finger in, and squeeze the intestines. 
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught under the bandage, untie it, and push the intestine out of the belly cavity. 
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find pus, take it with your thumb nail, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if an artery or vein opposes you, wind it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, put them with two threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape so that you pierce. 
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess into four parts on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound remain until it dries, and let the dead flesh come off by itself. 
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you find it subtle and rotten, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said; 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and suture the area. 
dou chancre	a sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work with medicine, and how one must avoid treatment with iron;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say that the ulcer spreads in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and they say that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped away like an ulcer that is on the breasts, and on the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it all when it is at the beginning; 
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I have never been able to heal any. 
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one heals without me before me. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the works, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile sometimes. 
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work; 
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then gird your tunic or shirt and shave his head from all sides and all bones leaving nothing. 
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood run freely and wipe the place with your hand or some other thing, and if the flow of blood goes against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with another cure until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is made by medicine and that which is cured by iron. 
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only split; 
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch it with iron in these two ways: 
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things; 
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this kind of dropsy which is called “split” and the treatment does not work, consider whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt; 
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: 
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lay the patient straight upon your hands, and have your assistant press on the belly at the lowest part below the breastbone, then take the sharpest pointed spatula according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be sharp on two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	At a point, but it should not be so inserted that it can reach the intestines when put in, and it cannot be bleached. 
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look to see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines:  
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If it is necessary, you should cut into them below the shoulder blade three fingers' width to the right. 
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the shoulder blade three fingers' width. 
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is due to the spleen, it should be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie upon the incision so that the superfluities do not run into the weak part.  
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it in, lift your hand as far as possible between the skin and the muscle, just like when flaying to the amount of a fingernail or so.  
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the eighth place, and this is the place of the needle, then pull hard, and push this instrument which has this form: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of willow or artichoke wood light, and has a small hole at the bottom part. 
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	And on one side, there are three holes. 
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And two on the other side, and one on another.  
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes use to cut the feather: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the head above is the point so that when the instrument comes to the needle's eye, it descends now onto the instrument.  
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is needed at that hour, the patient might die by chance due to the spirit's release from the weapon, or the head weakens, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the void of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue signifies; and his pulse. 
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held for the heart which stops the opening that is above the face, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; 
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the point with a small amount; 
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and be careful not to press while it remains but a prick of a point. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and you leave a lot of point, if the cure is from burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if he drinks; 
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment of drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the sharp object, as I said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	from the removal of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have a hole in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary as soon as possible, he has not pierced with a very subtle instrument according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or make a small plug of lead, and tie it and hold it for III days or IIII and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and urinate, and then put it back; 
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance none is needed, for the urine that comes out will not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose anus is small, if it is treated with a plum stone as we have said, it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the opening in their place are unfortunate, for no one is born who has the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; 
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the end, and it is a bad disease.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then extend the head of the penis and the foreskin as thin as a feather, so that the hole pierces in the middle, as it should. 
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful of the flow of blood which often comes, and if it happens, let it be stemmed by one who stems blood, and dress the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often these abscesses come on the penis, and are a sight of foul flesh; 
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is fitting that you take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and cleanse all of them, then put softened cotton with Egyptian ointment on them; 
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with diachylon ointment until it is healed.  
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the pus is malignant, of a foul color and corrupting, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have grasped it, and if the foreskin is on top of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the foreskin which is inside first.  
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is joined, then let the wound heal outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it together, unless the head of the penis is very secure so that it is not pierced, then blackness and corruption will come to its penis and testicles. 
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then bind on a plaster of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranates and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bloodletting is required, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Cauteries help in two ways together: 
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, in the stopping of blood and in the corruption.  
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you bring or conduct a cane of lead to the penis, and the patient urinates among it. 
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hairs grow around the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, it is necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; 
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a grievous thing to do this, it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula any spot on the head of the penis and of the skin; 
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then you must carefully separate them both, and put a fine linen cloth softened in cold water so that it does not burn at the beginning. 
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity like other wounds; 
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Whenever we do this work of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the lightest for safety. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want most masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions used a knife, with force, and a whole scalpel; 
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	which would cause the heart to faint because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves the one below. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Here it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is done with two layers, the point of the member is not well secured.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the cleansing of the ulcer if the iron should happen to escape and spoil the work, and many times they are born without needing cleansing and I want it so. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Regarding modification which is made to the strength of all the thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the strengths cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in a straight line all at once;  
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but let the threads be well twisted around the leather; 
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only doing to tie the thread around the penis, and then let them rejoice in all the ways that you can;  
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it come out straight between your hands, and support its weight between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; 
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and blow or breathe on it, and pull it upward until the head of the penis is inside; 
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well of the filth that has gathered there, then bind the place with a doubled thread, then bind it below the spot to the other binding; 
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And hold it with your two hands by the second binding to the thumb and index finger, and tie between the two bindings, then lift the core on top quickly and treat the head of the penis; 
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is best;  
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put powder on top and on top of the powder a dressing made from a half-cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, confected with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces for cleansing is this:  
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two jaws should be held and sharp, and the jaws should also be as large as the handle evenly: 
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of purification is when the kernels inside escape at the incision; 
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so that the pus will form an abscess; 
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And the tip similarly, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then use tweezers and then the tip. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it passes three days and what is below the penis is swollen, leave it until the abscess under it is appeased, and scrape it lightly. 
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you can move the tip, and keep yourself away from the penis, it will not harm anything.  
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat then the place of these internal wounds with powder, as we have said in our treatise on powders, and if the tip goes beyond the kernels too much and it rises above, it will not harm. 
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it as we have said until it is healed. 
dou retenement de l’urine	For the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or bowel obstruction, or a new growth, or similar things as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on their knees. 
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And let their feet be placed on the back and extend their belly above the back and restrain the patient from moving as much as they can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the neck of the bladder is compressed for the expulsion of the stone above so that the urine is released. 
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come as we have said and the patient feels great pain then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a "syringe" which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of refined silver, light as a bird's feather; 
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the handle be a palm and a half long, and refined at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of drawing out urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie at the head a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; 
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess wool and put it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;  
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the thigh; 
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then insert the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the one who guides where it goes is crooked; 
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine run. 
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And begin the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and align the patient.  
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scaldings or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then make all the instrument which is called a "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: 
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;  
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and let the veins be cut so that the medicine flows well into the penis without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and insert when needed. 
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicines enter the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and draw with the one that is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you treat the moisture at the caster, and then firmly reset the traction. 
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters in, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of a subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: 
si est ci:	This is it: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or of boxwood, and its head is higher;  
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below at its side where the linen strings are attached; 
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture which you have seen used to clyster the bladder, then tie it between the two sides with a good strong double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire; 
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the head of the clyster into the urethra, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture flowing in, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; 
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about. 
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dish, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument. 
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division the ways of stone and the extraction together with medicines; 
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have said the difference between a stone lodged in the reins and all the signs, and what kind of stone one should work on with an incision.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis; 
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp point of the stone resembles a sharp spike in its thinness. 
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And it opens wide, and grasps the patient's penis, and bends it many times, then twists it.  
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And many of these points are embedded. 
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And the healing is easy for children until they are four years old, and it is very painful for the elderly, and it is in between for those who are between youth and old age. 
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and push him down and move him below so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and comes out sometimes from above.  
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands evenly, and his hands be under his thighs so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; 
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then take hold of it and touch it inside. 
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut upon the stone.  
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not move at all when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger if the patient is a young man; 
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into their fundament and grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger then pull it to the neck of the bladder. 
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press upon your finger, and push it out where you see that you should cut.  
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the incision is made. 
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he puts the spatula in a cutting shape. 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And it cuts between what is between the buttocks and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock. 
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it is straight on the stone, and your two fists should be right at the fundament, and the waist should be wide externally and narrow internally, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large. 
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	If by chance the press is at the two fists which are at the fundament, so that it jumps out without effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know that there are stones with angles and edges.  
si est griés a issir;	If it is grated to come out. 
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if there are some that are underneath, resembling a bullet and round, of which the exit is easy.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore, for those which have angles and edges, make the incision larger. 
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, it is fitting that you extract it with tongs which are also like a file at the head, in order to pull out the stone so that it does not escape. 
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you insert beneath it a subtle instrument bent at the head; 
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot bring it out this way, enlarge the hole a little, and if the sinew is cut, extract it with vitriol. 
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then one above it, and then another, and so on with the smaller ones if there are several. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sewn and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or his urine comes forth immediately because the veins cannot solder together. 
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nonetheless, exert yourself to draw it out, or to break it up with tongs, as long as you draw it out in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on top a soft cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. 
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then let the patient rest on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.  
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if it arises very well in the place of oil and water, then treat it with diaphycon ointment and basil ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses come to the wound and corrode it, and there are blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained by this, which is known in part that it does not flow out with the urine: 
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then put your finger in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that every hour when you treat it, you bind his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra and stuck there, and the urine cannot pass; 
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment that I have described thus far is followed, you are excused from a surgical incision by this treatment. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already done this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron shaped like this, with three prongs fixed on a fire.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder; 
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then gently insert the instrument into the penis until it reaches the stone;  
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the instrument in your hand against the stone bit by bit until you can pierce the stone through to the other side; 
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.  
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is broken soon, and jumps out with urine, and is carried away by the patient; 
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for anything that defends it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make a rod at the place of the stone between the two ties, then pull it out, untie the tie, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does happen, the cure is painful and forbidden for three reasons: 
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself at her privy parts, even when she is chaste. 
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is if by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art of hands; 
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels you to do this, it is fitting that you take a midwife who is well-knowing, and she is rarely found; and if you cannot find her, then you should not hesitate to use a small, subtle knife. 
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry of the stone;  
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very well if the woman is a virgin: 
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is fitting for her to put her finger or foundation and seek the stone;  
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, if she compresses it below her finger, and recommends that she put her finger where the patient is, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, it is fitting that she moves it quickly from the entrance of the bladder to below, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh; 
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then press on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, where it is moved and appears, and feels the stone in that part;  
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the size be small at first; 
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then put the knife in the size, if you feel the stone so enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that many kinds of stones are: 
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have points. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the resemblances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the flesh swells, apply powdered vitriol to it, and hold it for an hour until the flesh is cauterized. 
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have instruments that I have told you about for extracting stones from men to help you in your work. 
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the flesh swells, and it is from an artery that has been severed, apply the powder to the area and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not restart this work, and leave the stone and do not remove it, lest the patient should die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, you return to your work, as long as the stone remains.
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramic aquose is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white phlegm, which is located below the heart of the testicles, which contains the seed. 
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "phlegm", and at no time is it properly in the fabric of the seed, if one thinks that it is another seed. 
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And this is the skin of the testicle between the white phlegm which we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And this would not have occurred otherwise. 
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice comes from weakness which comes to the yolks, and is spread out this matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And at no time if there is percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors:  
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Either it is a color tending toward yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscess has returned. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscess will return with part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg. 
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white membrane, then one feels it well. 
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, test all the instruments, of which the shape is described above. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, which comes after the introducer, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cauterize it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be purged according to our power and the repletion of his body. 
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then place him on his back, on something a foot high, and put many cloths under him. 
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the scalpel, sharp and clean, and cut through the skin of the testicles among them lengthwise, right down to the point, and make your incision straight, parting the skin of the testicles until you see white flesh, and carefully scrape it according to its nature.  
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white flesh plainly with a sharp needle, make one large opening and extract all the fluid, then apply your ointments and bandage the wound upward. 
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the white flesh.  
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut all or in pieces immediately the side of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sinew. 
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bring together the two leaves of the heart of the onions with a suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in order to stop the flow of blood; 
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the onion at all its suspensions and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.  
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; 
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened in rose oil; 
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put damp wool soaked in wine and oil on the two joints 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and make them of tow according to this likeness and let them be joined together by stitching at the throat of the breeches, and one of the ends take upon the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hilt; 
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two chiefs upon the two angles, and let all be assembled together in the loop of the breeches;  
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And it is often medicine this branch of the cautery in place of a blade of iron, and it is that you take a subtle culinary cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said so that the white fascia that contains the point is uncovered; 
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the cautery according to this form and pierce that fascia with awls, and flay it with this subtle hot cautery;  
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And loosen the cautery in every way you can until you completely remove it. 
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And be careful that the fire does not touch the eye.  
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is safer 
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and easier to manage in terms of blood loss and less dangerous than operations.  
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes wrong, whether it's an abscess forming, bleeding, or something else, treat what is causing the problem according to what has already been said. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure because of its horror, then perform a perforation as I have told you, and only when you are sure by the signs we have mentioned that the aqueous humor is gone, make the patient sit on a raised seat. 
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess at the bottom part of it, wide enough for the whole spatula to fit, and make the incision as long as the body.  
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the opening be wide so that all the sharp point may pass through 
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the spot and bind it and let it run through the remaining point then treat it until the wound is healed 
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not let the point out in the mouth of the wound then it is necessary that you put a quill or an instrument with which one treats the points of hydropsy in it, of which the shape is described above
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the sore and know that the point will return and will gather after six months or thereabouts and when it is gathered as before then the patient will spend his days like that  
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this branch there are more dangers
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the resemblances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, and likewise on the testicles; 
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is by many cases. 
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive sour and hot acidity, which is spread to the testicles, or by percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; 
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and there is no pain found, and it is an abscess sorrow;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are some abscesses gray porous and piercing, and of purple color, and sometimes it comes from a new artery, or from swelling of the vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a new artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; 
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not right that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	He who is made of swelling of the vein is known by his arrangement at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on the other humors; 
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And when you cut the heart of the testicles, then lift the egg up high, and the vein from the white sinew, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all sides of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already dead with these humors, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg, and cut it. 
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is air in the sinew, or in those that are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut the heart roundly. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is behind or further back, it is necessary that you cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling the bud, with softening of the testicles, and he who is ill groans when he goes. 
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is just as perilous as the one before it, and nonetheless we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then you put the suspensory of the testicles below your thighs, at all the vessels which are near the penis, and grasp the masters, and extend them. 
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with a sharp scalpel at a distance from the vessels so that they are uncovered, and then flay on each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples. 
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then he puts in a needle with a doubled thread and ties it at the first place where the vein appeared, and ties it straight to the other end. 
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then he cuts them in half straight according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted humors. 
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as you would any other where you are drawing out the poison so that no vessel breaks and nourishes one of the boils. 
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For if this does not happen, and all the vessels are visible, then you must drain the boils of all the vessels. 
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the bone does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped. 
de la routure dou syfac	Of a broken bone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrence of this rupture is by the section that comes or arises on the belly in the part of the intestines, so the intestines descend from that break to one of the boils. 
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either at the syfac or from the stretching of it, and these two manners come from many causes. 
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	either from percussion, or from a jump, or from a blow, or from lifting a heavy weight, and by similar things. 
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is a stretching of the sinews, if it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; 
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal towards the end, because the sinew presses on the intestine. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the sciatic nerve, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's rejection of the sciatic nerve.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never detach the intestines with the entrails, and they are retained within, and cause great pain to suffer to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way to work it is that you instruct the patient to knead the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can enter it;  
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then have him lean back on his neck between your hands and lift his thighs; 
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the heart above, and peel all the skin of the buttocks along its length;  
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert wedges of wood into the spaces of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that your eyes can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then flay the skin that is under the leather of the testicles, so that the white firm flesh is uncovered on all sides; 
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then put your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white flesh that is under the skin of the testicle, and between the second flesh, and separate that which is behind the testicle, and between the second flesh. 
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move with your right hand inside the heart of the testicles, and stretch the white flesh upward with your left hand, and lift the testicle up away from all the flesh towards the waist. 
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upward, and loosen that which is behind the ligature.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And inquire with your fingers if there is any intestine entangled or white firm flesh, and if you find nothing, then put it back into the abdomen below. 
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the thigh, which is after the skin of the testicles; 
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads; 
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the thigh, which we said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature in two parts; 
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the hairs of the threads and tie them in two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, so that no abscess may come. 
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place a second ligature according to the first ligature, long two fingers from it, and after these two ligatures leave the thigh which is below the heart of the testicles, a finger in width. 
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and afterward all the others according to the roundness which the egg bears; 
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then carve into the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as long as it does not cut the veins and the bowel, as we have said before; 
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply wool softened in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I apply the bandage that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize white flesh as we have said after incision, for fear of the shedding of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage as long as it oozes through it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is slow to drain, then it should be washed with hot water, and put on what we have said as long as it oozes; 
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.  
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like a twig that is together with the vine, in part so that you tie the vessels, after cutting under lightly below; 
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut into me, and cure the abscess of the one who works, as long as the vessels weep; 
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture comes in the angles, as we have said, and open its sides;  
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And do not draw out any of the intestines at the hips, and if any are drawn out, it is bad, and repair them every hour;  
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in all ways if it remains too long in this place, the wound or fistula will grow as long as the intestines are drawn out; 
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the fistula which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swells the sides and opens. 
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; 
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And it is sometimes cured with iron in this way: 
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And have the patient lie often on his back between your hands, then cover the area of the fracture swollen twice as wide according to the quantity of three fingers; 
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then extract the sinew which is under the skin than the usual, then take a knife and put it on the apparent area of the sinew. 
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press at the bottom of the belly, then sew the two apparent areas of the sinew on the head of the knife and sew one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the knife, and do not cover the sinew nor extend anything else as I have told you in the cure of the rupture of the intestines. 
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then cure it by curing the wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if the patient cleans and cares for the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is constricted and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauteries are milder in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men because the membranes inside are softened and it is made to be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wants to heal it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and peels off the softened skin from the natural skin. 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring the two lips together with a suture, and if you see fit, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four sutures firmly. 
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then peel between the sutures, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread. 
dou chastrement	where cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castration is forbidden in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of it in this book. 
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And it is only necessary for two reasons.
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	One is that the patient can answer when asked and understands the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The other is because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.  
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that cautery is done according to two manners: 
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by incision. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do by attraction, we make the iron sit in sharp heat until the coals are softened and hang down.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then we take them with our hand as long as they are cooled down and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the cautery of the waist:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the iron and press the skin of the coals with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and apply one blow to each eye when you have well scorched them. 
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no spot so that it can be seen and the subtle spot which is on the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of cautery is better than that which is done by attraction because in attraction some coals may remain by chance, which causes the iron to desire luxury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways like men: 
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is when between the two testicles appears also as the shape of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes urinates in front. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is for women, and it has a handle like a rod and two prongs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the man and woman is that you cut off all the added flesh, and treat it like other wounds; 
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles have no cure.
de la tentigene	From the tentorium
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tentingene is an added flesh upon the natural part, so long as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It behoves you to hold the superfluity of the tentingene in your hand or with forceps, and cut it lightly. 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not apply too much force, so that blood does not flow, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and there is another flesh that grows at the mouth of the wound and spreads, and by chance jumps further, and it appears like a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease." 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of wandering
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or when the opening is small; 
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or accidental through a sickness that has come;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by added flesh, or through subtle syphilis or some such thing, and it is made forcefully in the wound, or on the side, or below, or wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers; 
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the recognition of these is by looking at the swelling. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the splinters are close together, appearing on both sides or to the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle synovial fluid, and it is close to two liters, if you hurry, then do this:  
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spread her legs; 
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then extend the two liters, as long as the subtle synovial fluid is gone, and the strainings are over;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman rest at home each day, so that she cannot sew. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis sore is hard and thick, it is fitting that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the strainings are of bone, suspend it with an onctment and a cop;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and take medicinal substances that staunch blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with plenty of egg white.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a broad bandage soaked in water so the wound cannot close. 
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And do this for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen. 
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it should be treated with other remedies until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a boil comes to the flesh, if it should be covered according to this manner, unless it is an ulcerated abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an inflamed abscess which is in the marrow, one must not apply fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the division the likenesses of others, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive a cure.  
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the lul, when they are steeped in marrow, and they do not appear to the feeling, unless it is not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then hold the hemorrhoid with forceps and cut off its stem, then sprinkle medicinal powders that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water. 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if a discharge of blood comes, let him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gallnuts and similar things; then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on his back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it extinguishes, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, let him have cupping on his back and breasts without pricking. 
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take wool and moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; 
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albather" is red and is similar to sharp alum; if it is needed, cover it as I have said for the thelul; 
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the cheek
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the cheek, such as sore and pierced abscess and herpes and inflammations and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marsh, which is not of the abscesses that collect pus; 
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it mature until the pain is eased; 
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a stool, and let it have two small stools where he leans, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together towards the outer part of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; 
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then draw the abscess towards the right side and prepare the instrument with which one works the mouth of the abscess, from which the shape will come afterward;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being used, you insert the point first to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters the instrument does not go in deeper than it should and so that it does not injure the patient. 
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not injure it. 
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary for him to put the funnel of the instrument above and to hold the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and it is made soft with the hand, if necessary cover it at first with linen or a spatula.  
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the bowels are emptied, it is necessary that you put softened tents into the wound in oil of roses, or in dried green oil. 
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the strong tent of the wound to the end of the marrow, and put by fire on the marrow and on the handle leave clean linen moistened in vinegar or honey are cooked; 
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the cure after two days of anointing following it, until it is healed; 
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and no time lift the marrow and the wound by enema of vinegar and honey, and then of vinegar or long roots of lily and aristolochia are cooked; 
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to anointing. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the marsh, it is fitting that you guard against cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman hasten down, and desire to smell the air: 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child hastens out with force.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then know that those childbirths are according to natural figure, and is the issue under its head, and the afterbirth with it; 
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is fitting to press their belly lightly so that the infant comes out quickly; 
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends onto its head, the placenta comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; 
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it sometimes comes onto its feet, and the body or head comes out first, and the hands, or it comes onto its stomach, or often, and is accidentally turned on its neck, and by other bad positions; 
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should help her. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes onto its head by natural passage, and the woman labors painfully, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool, or have women hold her; 
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and make a poultice of oil or fenugreek when cooked, and then insert the ball between its two halves the small spatula which is in this form: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the second finger, and cut off at its nail until the moisture that is inside comes out. 
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the belly of the woman until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil. 
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take and sneeze from mustard seed, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	then the infant will now come out. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out weak, then you must gently reset them little by little.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool and raise her feet. 
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then unseat her from the stool onto the ground, and hold her so she does not shriek during the unseating. 
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cut her hands with a knife that was previously placed there, and extract the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, if he needs to be pushed upward; 
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is equal.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take it by the feet and extend it little by little. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up to the thighs, then command her to take it and make her sneeze forcefully;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps further, then God wills it. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, if it returns little by little, until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come further as we have said, take a mixture of elderflower and sesame oil and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the nature of the woman inside and remove this ointment, then make her sit in a warm bath up to under her ribs; 
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is softened underneath, give her a collar of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; 
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and draw out her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child leaps now. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this manner, if it puts its hands on its belly little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let it be swaddled on its neck, and hang its feet down, and let it lie upon the bed; 
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold its hands little by little, and then place its hands upon its belly, and remove the cushions underneath until it is fully exposed downwards; 
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then he takes his feet and lifts them up, then lifts his belly upwards, then pushes with his hands. 
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And he shakes the child little by little.  
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And he instructs the woman to hold on until the child sits up. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of a child who comes forth, with one hand pendant
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand:  
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then have the woman stand up and walk. 
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then have her sit on the bed and straighten out her legs.  
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then apply the muscle relaxant that I have described. 
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair and then study how to bring back the hand.  
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And shake the child according to its natural form and make it sneeze, instructing her to hold on until the child sits up firmly. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child upon its neck, and let it spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is fitting that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly; 
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is equal, he puts on the natural ointment of ivy and oil, as we have said, then instructs her to move little by little; 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to take hold; 
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the second joints
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes strong in this manner to the entire second joint, he applies the second joint to your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained; 
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child can put its hands on its face and neck, he applies it from the elbow down so that it is not held back, and kills the child; 
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside as long as you have put it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold at no time: 
adonques si istra legierement.	then if you gently pull it 
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and rarely are three or four born; 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it does happen. 
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live if born;  
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that when they are multiplied, and are nourished by the milk which flows from the breast;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they are also born naturally as one under another, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are born prematurely, so the care is as we have said, and the child is delicate, make quickly and gently what she does;  
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do as is best for its salvation. 
de plusors enfans	of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the midwife knows all this, because such things may happen by chance;  
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If you do according to what is right. 
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for stillbirth or dead child in the womb, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands. 
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and has no illness or fear of death.  
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman should be placed on her back, with her hips inclined downwards, and her legs raised. 
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the attendant should hold her down in two places, or tie her to the bed so that she does not move during the removal of the child. 
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the womb with warm oil mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek mucilage and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and mucilages. 
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then put them in the marrow slightly, then want the place where they put the splints that are suitable for it, and take care if the child is frightened that he should descend on his head. 
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If he puts the splints in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under his beard or in his throat or near his ribs, and if his descent is on foot, then he puts them or a dagger and at the middle ribs. 
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that he holds the splint in his right hand and puts the curve between the two fingers of his left hand and puts it gently with all his hand and puts the splint in none of these places that we have said, as long as he comes to the empty thing.  
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the splint: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then put it against the other splint, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.  
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are stretched equally by moving back and forth, in order to come out, and let the incisors be toothed in order to hold them, as this is the form: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, anoint the wound with some of its two drops of oil, and put them in that part, and pull out the other part; 
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if none remains, put this incisor or higher up, and do this as much as it comes out all the way. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the tightness, it is fitting that you wrap it up on a cloth, until it comes out all the way; 
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cut at the joint of the sole or at the knife, and so it is fitting that you do this in the other hand, and with both feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is sharp bone assembled, then you should put the sharp spatula between your fingers, press the head and extract the sharp bone. 
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Then you will turn it to an instrument that is called "almidach," from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one. 
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And in the same way, do this if the infant has a large head naturally. 
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head comes out too far and is extracted by force, it should be split, so that the moisture that is or in the bad birth canal comes out. 
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then cut it into as many pieces as you can.  
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture runs out. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and straightening at the mouth of the uterus is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is embedded in the belly or breast, you should remove it wrapped in a cloth on the hand; 
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and covering the belly or breast, until the moisture which is there runs off;  
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then put the hand on the mouth of the wound and draw it up to the mouth of the wound; 
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts in one or two fingers and draws them out.  
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot boil which has come there, then one should not work at it, but rather administer moist and fatty things;  
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, made of herbs that are sharp, softening and moistening. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the arrow is on its side, and you can put it straight, then administer what we have said about the living child; 
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one does not have power, so let it be cut into pieces and leave nothing of the sinew. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses which come in the marrow.  
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if bleeding comes forth, it should be put into a tight bandage, and apply other treatments. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had a dead child inside, then she conceived another on top of it, and the other one was born dead too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess appeared on his arm, and it swelled so much that it opened, and then began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought for a long time, and could not sew the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled greatly, for this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I cleansed the wound and set the bones by hand until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I kept the woman for a long time like this, and there remained afterward only a little hump on the spot. 
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have not recorded this chapter other than for this reason: so that when masters encounter a strange thing they may know how to help it. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here follows the form of the pressor, with which one crushes books;  
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns as the head of the two linens. 
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horn should be more delicate than the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood. 
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And its mouth should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be one, and a half palms long. 
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which should be firm on one side and the other, half a palm long or a finger more.  
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the mallet to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs. 
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And it has two horns and two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vulva open to all instruments, make the woman sit down off the bed with her feet dangling and legs open, then insert the two stirrups together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; 
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you did with the forceps equally, according to the amount that you see the mouth of the vulva open, as long as the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted and are multiplied in their likenesses;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the surgeon has them prepared, so much quicker is the work, and higher are the hopes for their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare your instruments, their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze on purpose, and extract your hands from her mouth and nose; 
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps through it, all is well. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it does not, then take a pot and make a hole or lid in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea and centaury; 
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot with water over the fire; 
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cane or tube in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and let it steam until the vapors enter the wound; 
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make her sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the shoulder jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, order the patient to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then put it on the wound, and let it stay for a while.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, if she takes hold of it and extends it little by little straight so that the marrow does not break during extraction. 
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But then it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled. 
si venra et se desaerdra.	It will come out and loosen.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is narrow, we have said the cure is sneezing and fumigating herbs; 
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it's not from all that we have said, be careful not to pull the opposite way; 
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the marrow tie it to the thigh of the woman, then anoint her with tetrapharmacy ointment. 
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If she purges and returns, and will come out strong;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But in any case, when she purges, it comes with a bad odor to the stomach and head, and weakens the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So it is necessary then suitable fumigations for this: 
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.  
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one smokes the woman for the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is seen to resemble a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the heads wide on the fire; 
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the moth as long as it is eaten up, and begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather have it stopped by a subtle tool: 
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary then for the midwife to pierce that tool with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and she guards the placement so that it does not touch;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the cure of anointing until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay in place, put or insert a cane of plum wood, and leave it for seven days, and have it removed when the child wants to go to the chamber pot.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this inflammation comes from the opening of a wound or abscess. 
si covient coper celui soudement:	So it is necessary to cover that opening. 
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If it is cured, as we have said of the chain of lead. 
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come below the buttocks are nodules and swellings that come from below the buttocks or in the space between the two parts, whether it is one fistula or several. 
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that nodule is old, if it works, and still produces moisture which causes white or subtle boils, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by the fact that there is discharge or flatulence when the patient makes a bowel movement, and perhaps it jumps one time. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that pierce as far as the bladder and as far as half of the penis; 
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee. 
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula draining at the fundament, and not draining: 
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you put your thumb or finger on the fundament, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, you put in a tent of fine linen, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;  
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there comes no discharge of pus or wind or worm, as we have said: 
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce through;  
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure it.  
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the urethra, then the urine escapes and cannot be held back by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, the tent comes up to that place; 
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no crookedness and the origin of the pain is elsewhere, it is as if he bows to it, and neither medicine nor ointment is of any use.  
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas that persist there is no stronger cure than hard work, and the vanity of foolish doctors who interfere with it. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; 
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the base, it is fitting that you insert your index finger, and feel then if the tent has pierced it;  
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and let it be uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is pierced. 
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not work, one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One always says that one can heal them well, but this rarely happens;  
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is heated according to the width of the fistula as it is said before; 
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the end all hot in the fistula, as long as it comes from the bottom; 
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this II or III times, as long as you know that these bad sinews are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;  
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the dressing of softened tents in butter, as long as the sinew dries out, then the dressing of ointment hardening sinew and soldering. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot otherwise be healed; 
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters but does not pierce through to the bone which is its foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at that point where it goes beneath this covering. 
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the opening of the fistula is at the beginning and extends forward before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards, as far as it reaches the head of the tent; 
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be delivered and will fall away; 
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then cleanse those faulty flesh parts which resemble a bird's feather, so that none remain. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood comes, and is cut between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cauteries bring together two things:  
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	namely, the burning of those added flesh parts, and the stemming of blood and drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then apply a dressing softened with butter or crushed cheese until the wound swells, and let the charring be burned in the swelling. 
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with bandages soaked in strong vinegar, which are dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the foundation and is distant from the body, stick it with your thumb or finger, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the dressing and between the two is cloth or linen or charring, where it is about to pierce, unless there is a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods: 
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, you put dressings and treat as before. 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too far in perfection, lest you cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and let the excrement come out against your will;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	Perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it once it is cut away from the foundation, either by hand or with another pointed instrument. 
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse that rotten flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can. 
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula on the side away from the foundation.  
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it were a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And fistulas are never made in this manner: 
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you insert the tent into the fistula and it is near or touches the foundation of the skin above, then take a pierced tent at its head according to this form. 
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bend the thread in two, and I put the tent on the whole thread into the fistula as far as the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then remove the thread from that perforation, so that you insert your finger or foundation. 
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and treat the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and pull one from the other, and leave it for one or two days; 
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it several times, as long as the threads hold those fibers that are between them, and they shrink;  
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is sewn and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, as long as it is not too inflamed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make for the placement cover so soon, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatuila used for making a fistula must be very sharp and cutting on one side; 
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side, blunt, so that you do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: 
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude from the fundament and at the head of the fundament; 
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those which are weak have a bit of moisture, and still now or a bit of sharp citrine or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body; 
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have them in their foundations, if it is such that you command the patient to stretch himself out to go into chambers, until the foundation allows them to appear, and the threads are seen; 
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and hold it with tweezers, or hold it at your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; 
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out at your will, then cut them, and powder over them some hot powders that are in place of a cautery; 
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed. 
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot come out, give the patient a harsh and sharp enema to wash out what is in the foundation so that it can come out openly. 
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient complains, and if the thread is strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.  
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you take them with your fingernail or with tongs and cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.  
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is fitting that you administer the suture according to this manner: 
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce through the other side, then turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and so it is doubled.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and pull out the forming thread, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave it to correct the excess of blood. 
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put on the base a soft cloth moistened in rose oil or wax, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest. 
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it until they fall out, and when they have fallen out, then cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of dryness of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there occurs dryness of veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no avail.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you scrape off the bark with the tip of a knife or your fingernail, so as not to let it become moist. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then cure it until it is healed as is fitting.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, then start the scraping again stronger than before, until it heals a lot and is well scraped.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is healthy. 
dou fremit	Where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A boil is a small foul appearance against the body, and it goes out very quickly
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and often one finds it cold, and one also feels it as dead numbness, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a cane from a goose quill, or a strong vulture quill, and place that cane on the numbness, until the circles completely encircle the numbness;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand on all of the cane until you grasp it all around the numbness, and pull it out quickly, and uproot the numbness from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make one of a thread of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and wide above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, but hold tight to the pain and press. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that it must be cauterized, do so as described in the chapter on cautery.  
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes a clyster of silver or artichoke is made, or melted lead or mallet; 
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And sometimes these small and large instruments are made, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large clyster is wide on top, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if you see that the belly is tied and pierced as it is, 
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there are two openings on one side, and one on the other;  
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly or where medicines are placed is made from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and there is one space between each hole, then insert into these holes one strong thread of raw silk twisted in X or any shape around them, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat;  
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then give an enema. 
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently. 
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until all is squeezed out, then extracts the clyster and has the patient lift their legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, they should hold it as long as they can. 
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps all night, it is of greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize it for a disease of flux of the belly, and the medicine hastens to go in, then begin again until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child. 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the shape of the subtle clyster on which the skin is removed: 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the aforementioned section the treatment of wounds; 
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you the treatments with hands and medicine, according to its accomplishment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of a stone and the cutting of a sword and knife or lance or gun or arrow or similar things; 
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or that are made according to their locations in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck or head or foot or belly or liver and similar limbs; 
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment of each wound and begin with simple head wounds because remembrance will come in its chapter.  
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care if it is from a striking of a stone or similar things and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: 
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it bleeds quickly from the cephalic vein itself, if only a little blood comes from the wound, and it is bled from the opposite side of the injured part 
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid having the patient overeat wine and rich foods. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not want to bleed, let its meat be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat any pork. 
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if a pustule should come, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine. 
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no hot pustule, put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeds freely, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later. 
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stitching, then bring them together with sutures as I will say for abdominal wounds, from stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it can, and does not hold but to one point, then stitch it. 
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten leather, and it does not reach the bone, stitch all the rot together, then cut it away, then treat it. 
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if it has an artery in the wound or vein which without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. 
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, then cauterize it.  
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: 
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and put this powder on it so that it fuses as if the fire had moved it. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is: 
pren encens une partie;	Take incense one part; 
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts; 
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	quicklime three parts, and powder it finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it burns well and joins with all its blood;  
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; 
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do this with chalk alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has dried the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has already moved the wound, do not put this powder on it at all;  
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put some digested ointments on it, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows freely; 
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure of other cures until he is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle pincers; 
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves in the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment alone and not apply anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be underneath, such as chamomile boiled in fresh water and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber also boiled in fresh water, and other stones of alum according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, then pierce it lower. 
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then tie it off, bind it, and cautery is necessary. 
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is preserved through which the flesh goes, sew the heart onto the bone of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. 
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then remove it carefully and leave it for a few days, then treat it with dry dressings until it is healed. 
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it.  
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can. If those that you cannot reach, then leave them until the wound has suppurated and is cleansed and the way out is cleared.  
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, put powder on top of the powder that I have mentioned. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a cut from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound lets out wind, while the patient is standing. 
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	You should then know that the wound is mortal; 
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it because of the blood that will not stop flowing completely and return to the heart and kill the patient. 
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But apply a drawing ointment, and bind it twice a day; 
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to soak up excess moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.  
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there will come no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart nor twitchings of the flesh; 
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	So cure it then with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and the work, then know that there is a fistula;  
si la cure si com on doit.	if the care is as one must. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple, whether on the thigh or back, care for that which is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, with sutures; 
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is driven into the bone, and has split into pieces, clean the wound, and treat the wounds if they are detached; 
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, so it will make extraction easier. 
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds of other limbs, judgement is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	regarding rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from a large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, by which entry of others is permitted.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in more carefully if they are not put back hot.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and do not go back in carefully, and therefore a moderate wound is better, because one can move the intestines to their place more easily than the others.  
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners: 
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body, and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds. 
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is out, and grievous thing is to put it back in, this is by one of two manners: 
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen because of the cold.  
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in two ways: 
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water only, or you cook in warm water, vinegar and cypress and spikenard, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And at no time make this wine restraining, and it is a mother that has only one breast to reduce swelling. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with sharp or sweet and well-cooked herbs, for by this is aligned the entry to few things. 
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a small cut at the instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids. 
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first remedy is a mother that is smaller than the waist, so that none should be carved without great necessity. 
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the instruments for splitting it: 
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If you cut inside the curvature and don't tear, and see here the shape:  
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you can put them back into their natural form in their proper place, do so, for this is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. 
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the breast higher than the parts below, and also if the break in the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your understanding so that the injured part is higher than the other. 
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in large and small wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds, put what appears to you, then have between your hands one minister who holds all the break with his hand and brings together the lips; 
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and put in a needle where it has a good strong thread; 
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is below the skin inside, as far as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew four together;  
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain a double thread onto the needle in two parts, then join the two edges of the wound carefully together and leave one finger space. Then insert another needle. 
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle and do not cease doing this according to how many needles are needed until the whole wound is closed. 
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the flesh and too thick ones cannot enter well. 
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is necessary that they are medium sized; 
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And it is not right to push the needles too far through the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the stitching.  
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then cut the threads of the needles so they do not bother the patient while sleeping and put bandages or cloths over the needle threads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. 
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices one needle or two. 
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it consists of assembling the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the sinew together on one needle with a strong medium thread. 
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all these sides together, pull the needle back to where you began, in the manner one sews cloth. 
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And place a distance between each stitch the thickness of a small fingernail.  
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch heals a man, and I sewed a wound one had on his belly or chest which was inflicted with a knife, and the wound was more than a handspan large, and the intestines protruded two handspans, and the wound lay in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back his intestines after they had been outside for XXIV hours, and the wound was sutured up to XV days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they thought he would die, and it was a miracle. 
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not anoint him at all, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. 
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: 
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and push it from the outer part to the inner part. 
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the flesh straight through, take the thread or twine or whatever you used to push the needle through and make it pierce from the other side, from the inner part to the outer part. 
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as furriers sew furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side and take it up on the other, until the whole stitch is complete. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is as some do, who bring the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads of the thread to the other head, in this manner: 
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle or head of silk thread close by, and pierce only that spot, and leave the two heads of the thread. 
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and pierce it from the part behind to that inside, with the two heads of the thread. 
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one and the other from the part behind to that inside, with two other heads of silk thread which are on the other side. 
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the gentler manner of suturing and the more common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen said this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or he has thread in each. 
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew straps; 
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is halfway down the belly, the stitching is more painful than in other places of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: 
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the fire had moved it, then put back together the intestine, and the seam;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on burnt charcoal powder, and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound swells; 
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew the thread, and let the sinews be joined together, and the muscle fibers
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; 
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicine, put upon it as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton and move it twice a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine in many situations unless the wounds are complex; 
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound will cause infection to the principal limbs, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil or rose oil and place it around the edges and under the armpits. 
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, give enemas of warm red wine and likewise if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines.  
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce it within and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the plantations of veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the gristle jumps from the wound, put it back as you would the intestine, while it is fresh; 
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has become green or black, you must bind the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries. 
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the ligatures and put the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until it comes out to align the extraction when the gristle shrinks and the wound swells. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the fracture of the bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, you can restore it in some men, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a spear; 
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and excrement and wind came out.  
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put a remedy according to what I could, and did not cease to refine it until he was healed, and his wounds closed. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw his wounds close, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his belly; 
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not have any pain, but remained in better health, and ate and drank;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in a certain way: 
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take thread with large heads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it squeezes its mouth shut; 
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut the thread head, and it will stay so that it cannot loosen, then put another thread afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	And sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If those hairs burn inside the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: 
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this thread from the intestine, which is well-detached, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread twisted tightly, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and straighten it at the break; 
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing is nothing more than according to the way of cunning and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is nothing but subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and drawn inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	A fistula is, according to the green color, a hard and white node, where there is no pain felt, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird; 
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes the bowels are clear, and other times thick; 
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes it's few, and other times enough; 
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And as I have spoken of in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of nine causes: 
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; 
ou por sa malice;	or because of its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and on the edges that does not allow new flesh to grow; 
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there are too many bowels;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the wound is purulent and the matter is of poor quality; 
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for healing;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is in the manner of a pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where by its nature digestion is delayed in the region, and feeling is slow, and it swells; 
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:  
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it is necessary for me to teach you the treatment of a fistula which is made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all the members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the face, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; 
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it extends to the nature of the principal member, and similar ones.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are of this kind are due to poor healing, and there is nothing but toil, and ignorance; 
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not come all the way to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure and see it clearly, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight; 
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, if it searches with a subtle attempt to plumb, for the plummet bends and moves around the twistiness; 
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will pass from one opening to another and cleanse it; 
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then let the patient bleed as much as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is raised in a proper manner, and inquire well of the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it; 
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the corruption and rotten flesh that are within;  
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the right place, it is fitting that you cut it thoroughly, as much as you can, then put tents softened in medicine water, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which remains at the bottom; 
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put ointments spreading healthy flesh, as long as it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves trouble you or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then wash it as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then treat it with spreading healthy flesh things as long as it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and goes back in as before, know that you have not gone far enough. 
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if you uncover and scrape as much as you can until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place; 
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, it is good. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reach it; 
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; 
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small bone corrupted and you can pull it out with forceps, extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind; 
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture works against you and there is no error or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh and free the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting decay on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then you will be able to remove the bones more easily. 
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as those of the leg or thigh, only allow the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound. 
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part that has become corrupt and comes up to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	you must sew and cover everything up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take an example and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came to his leg and it swelled into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.  
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the sick through their folly worked so much on the abscesses that they opened them and corroded many substances and became fistulas and there came many openings which all flowed with pus and moisture from the body. 
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many sick people put treatment on for two years and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called upon and saw his leg and the medicines by which he was treated and what flowed from the openings with great force. 
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And it became red the flesh of the youth and had a yellow color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pushed a tent into one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hurried then and dug into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came even to the bone within. 
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I cut away all that appeared to me of the corrupted bone and thought there was no other corruption except for that which I removed. 
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And begin to restore the wound with hot medicines for a long time, and it cannot heal. 
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I began again and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I treated it, and then I removed it, and I tried to heal the place. 
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not do so until I scraped away a palm's width of bone, and the wound pulsed throughout its entire length, then I restored it with medicines. 
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it healed and closed quickly, and I did not have to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation it often bled, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contrariety at all, neither in coming nor in going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place in the body, it must be treated in this way: 
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take linen and bind it to the head of the bone that is visible, and order someone to extend it upwards.  
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And put another bandage of linen thicker than the first bandage, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, and extend the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh out from below, and uncover the flesh on the place where you see sinew, so that the sinew does not blanch the flesh.  
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And put a coal or a board under the bone to make the corrupted flesh rise up. 
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to boil as much sinew as one can see and feel the corruption, and boil it again another time.  
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh. 
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put a coal underneath, and then boil from one part to the other the corruption, and let the boiling be as long as the corruption is deep, as we have said.  
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then treat the corrupted joint, and the bone where it holds from the other side. 
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than to treat both. 
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the wrist or ankle, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire into this ailment, how it reveals itself to you. 
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve do not oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the instruments and saws for treating these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. 
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, it is necessary to have the appropriate instrument for each kind of work.  
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. 
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	So prepare the instrument you need according to what is fitting. 
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder dislocates either from within or from without; 
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have medicine that will corrode it through the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, then bind that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by this means death or malice, which is greater, from the lack of the limb; 
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and swells after the blackness, because the corrosion goes from limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; 
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to cut it out, and if it is by the sting of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion and an adder and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the vein, cauterize it, and do not give it any space to come as far as the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes as far as the hand, cauterize it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm; 
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, cauterize it at the elbow; 
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the amount of its venom; 
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same thing when the corrosion comes to the foot: 
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, cauterize it after the other joint;  
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot; 
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, cut it at the knee joint;  
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; 
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the way to cut or sew the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister the lower binding, and another minister the upper binding, and you sever the flesh between the two bindings at a span wide, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cut or sew, and place on each side a linen cloth so that the sewing does not touch the healthy area, and causes the patient further injury and abscesses. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs while you are working, quickly cauterize the area or apply some restraining powders; 
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; 
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man in his left foot: 
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corruption first came in the back of his foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot; 
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered the foot, and was healed; 
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And a long time afterwards the corruption returned to the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that drive it back after cleansing the body, and I could not stop the corruption; 
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of driving back the matter; 
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak; 
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; 
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I do not tell this except for the fact that one should do otherwise, if need be.  
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in flesh, and remains so long that it makes a large gathering of pus; 
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and opens, and the pus flows out, and the wound remains empty, like some vessels; 
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above it is also as delicate as fine linen cloths, and does not run down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a sickness is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula"; 
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a "fistula". 
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the cook if it is such that you cut the whole skin around it, and likewise when it is thin, as a cloth. 
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And it does not spoil because of its putrefaction.  
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you believe that the skin will burn, and the putrefaction is not complete, and the skin is thick as leather, then cure it with an enema like this: 
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the breasts are large, and the belly that is in it has a foul smell, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: 
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take alum, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;  
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take some according to your need, and make it with vinegar and honey, and apply it as a poultice on the breast, and draw out the purulence. 
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it while squeezing.  
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is softened and the pus is removed. 
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And sometimes apply a poultice of ash water when this medicine is not present, taking ashes from vine wood, pouring vinegar over them, then straining it and applying it as a poultice until you know the breast is well cleansed. 
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then apply a poultice of vinegar and honey or one containing a bit of powdered litharge. 
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Where you cleanse it with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the healthy part air. 
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well purified, then cleanse it with something that produces flesh in it, and take a plaster that promotes healing, and make it with rose oil and wine. 
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of the properties or treatise on ointments; 
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron instrument, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment, as long as it is enlarged. 
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, sew it up so that only the place where the enema can enter remains open; and if the opening that leads to the bowels is above, then make the cut lower than where it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the belly is in perfect condition, do not let flesh grow. 
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in such a way that the belly runs to the lowest place where it is; for when the belly is perfect, do not let flesh grow and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in this way. 
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Let the belly run slightly downward, and do not let anything of the belly remain;  
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to draw out the health, and extend upon a linen sheet that covers all the health. 
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cover as forcefully as possible the hole of the breast so that it is wider than the first, and extend ointment gently upon the other cloth according to the quantity of the hole, and place it upon the hole of the breast to align the belly, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once. 
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is out the hole of the breast, often removes the bowels to know what runs from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, whether digested or undigested. 
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in a certain way and you see the nature that leaps upon the hole of the breast, know that the breasts will soon heal, and health approaches. 
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change another bandage, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast swells with undigested food after many days, know that the breast does not aerate.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and some who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested bowels leap from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not heal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to heal and are extended, apply drying medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as diachylon ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; 
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diachylon ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rosewater of old wine equal in substance; 
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it and use it;  
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same one made thicker when diachylon ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is off the fire; 
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then make it into a paste and spread it on the breast, and sometimes administer aristolochia longa, and roots of orchis mascula, which are also like flour of vetch and centaury; 
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simples or compounds: 
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; 
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the sore is lengthened and is not cured by this remedy, then know that the corruption is thoroughly embedded, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in ligaments; 
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A felon is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance arises in other places; 
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is envied, and no attention is paid to it, then it comes as a large abscess, running and dripping pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance runs through all of it; 
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And corrosion comes to the bone, until there is a foul stench of pain, and the flesh around it becomes wide, and its color is dark. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the superfluity that remains from the ulcer, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; 
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to grow, and the wound, then it is necessary that you put the point of a knife under the nail where it touches the flesh, and lift it up, and cut this flesh delicately and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; 
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wounds until they are healed.  
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and treat it fiercely, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal; 
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the flesh corrupting, cut it out in a manner as previously described, then treat it until it is healed; 
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal it. 
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the splint with a sharp knife across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the splint, for the patient would feel too much pain; 
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on it that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two growths that are born in the hands of some men are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone where there is flesh, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of these are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born in any part of the thigh do not move, and those born at the joint of the thigh may move; 
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of that which is fleshy is light, in a certain way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide splint. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to heal:
si te tien dou coper.	you must hold it together.  
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born or about to be born soon, it is fitting that you first shave the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for him, then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Solderings which come together at the two ends come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you mend this suture so that it may repair according to its natural form. 
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil, so they do not stick together.  
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you can put between two thin slices of plum, as long as the wound is soldered, as it should be. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a soldering comes to any of his limbs with the palm, then cover that solder as it should be done.
des vils	of old
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large winding vessels full of melancholic superfluities which come from many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer purging with colocynth to him, and then apply balm of basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is according to two methods: 
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is where one cauterizes them and draws forth the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you bind the vein and draw out all the blood. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The length is according to this manner: 
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, raise the leg with hot water very strong, until the flesh becomes subtle, then strain the leg from the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; 
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, of a wide size, then loosen and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer; 
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then bind it, and command him to abstain from meats containing black bile; 
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin the evacuation and cleansing again when the veins are full, and it is of benefit to the patient.  
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The alleviations for this are according to this manner: 
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put him in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swells the veins; 
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then apply the heated part to the vein near the head of the knee, or in the area below the ankle; 
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then apply the leather to the incision, and flay the vein from each side until it appears when touched; 
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters the leather it also appears white like a cord; 
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then push the vein down as far as it is raised from the leather, and then lift it lightly at the incision, then apply it to the other place above three times; 
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then flay the leather on top of the vein until it appears, then lift it with the vein as you did, and lift it at another incision, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then make another incision, or several if needed, then lift it and apply it to the calf of the foot, then pull and lift it up to the second incision; 
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it piece by piece, until it is all out, then the cup. 
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot pull it out and lift it, then insert a needle at all its length doubled strong, tie it, and pull it, and insert it below the root, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out. 
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And be careful that it does not break off, for if it breaks off, one cannot pull it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient. 
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have removed it all, put over the site of the wound wool softened in wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and dress it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not break it. 
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts a vein, if it is curved and does not cut, let it cut the vein; 
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and this is the form: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is planted in legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; 
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body snakes and worms, plant between the skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder opens, it is fitting that you wrap around a piece of linen from three and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and let the linen hang down on the leg, and every time it is damp with pus, wrap it around the linen, and tie it. 
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a portion and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out. 
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot or a wound, and evil sickness. 
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Because of this, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain on the body. 
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And it sometimes happens that this vein when treated is ten palms long or even twenty, and a man once came to me to whom it was twenty palms long, and when you cut it, it will burst into one or more holes and pierce through to the bottom so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the area poultices that prevent putrefaction at any time, then treat it as you would an abscess. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never at this vein but two rain-drops, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot or leg and there comes a great deal of pus, and then it leaps rain. 
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure it then as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms which are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This illness is called in our land “ox disease,” because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well from limb to limb as long as it remains under the skin where it travels, and leaps hard; 
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it comes from putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms and snakes and lampreys and ascarides or roundworms come from the belly; 
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one fears its wickedness, because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may enter and destroy the eye; 
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it heal and drain, you cannot force it except when it goes. 
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut it above and drain it forcefully, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies. 
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm that it does is that it runs the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming or close to the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cut it above and drain it forcefully.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is necessary to treat the patient with purifying medicines that dissolve harmful humors, and they should avoid meats that cause decay. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then can move from limb to limb; 
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; 
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and shortly after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to her shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it moves from one place to another; 
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that area and settled in her shoulder, and then shortly after ran throughout her body until it reached her other arm; 
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was turning again throughout her body, just as I saw.  
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had seen many who claimed to move pain from place to place, but I had never seen it as clearly as I did in this woman; 
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and that is why this constrained wind appeared; 
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear according to this reason in those who are fleshy and have moist bodies and filled veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this illness being healed, and the patient feels this pain as we have said, if it appears to you, immediately bandage it tightly above and below, then apply a poultice on top until this constrained wind leaves. 
et cauterize le leu;	And cauterize the place; 
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it at your own hands, then the cure of those who expel winds, such as foul-smelling pills and serpent pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of theirs is that there are some which have large points, and small ones, and bristling ones, and joined ones; 
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces; 
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And that which falls in no member falls according to two manners: 
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Where it falls in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear to you: 
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It is fitting that you refrain from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterward in several ways;  
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely embedded, then treat it and care for the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is above the brain, is when there is dimming of sight and stupor and trembling and redness in it, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; 
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without strength from the nostrils, or ears; 
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps loses speech and voice; 
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and there leaps from the wound white moisture resembling pus, and it also leaps like a burn from a chariot wheel;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, keep away from the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not embedded. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of an arrow when it is lodged or stuck are that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; 
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and dark blood flows from it, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: 
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Know then without doubt that death approaches.  
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has not been removed is that without any discharge of pus it leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and desires cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow is lodged in the covering of the buttock, it is below the small ribs; 
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and gives great weariness and great pain and sighing; 
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance, some undigested meat may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow lodges in the belly or bowels, and no part of it sticks out through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine jumps and begins to flow, and the patient feels great pain: 
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal. 
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happens to a man that an arrow falls or pierces at the root of the nose:  
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and drew it out on the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any trouble. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew out an arrow for a man that had lodged in the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was blunt, and one could only reach the point toward the fletching, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; 
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The player was healed, and no evil accident befell him. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:  
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beard, and skillfully extracted it until I removed it, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I removed an arrow from a man, who had it stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die;  
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; 
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow and pierced it, and removed it forcefully, and he did not suffer any ill effects. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen in the back, and the wound was sealed over;  
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural state in any way, nor did it cause him harm in any of his natural functions. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sewn. 
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remained thus without suffering great pain; 
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And treat an arrow to a man of the princes, the king, which had fallen among his nose, and was sloping a bit toward the right side; 
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was all embedded. 
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat it after it had fallen three days. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I carefully tried to find it and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a throbbing and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put on the place a poultice that was attractive and digestible so that the flesh would not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the arrowheads. 
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put on a plaster for several days and sewed up the wound thoroughly, and kept the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his flesh. 
et il le me dist.	And he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put a caustic medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and I tried it and felt the head of the arrow stirring in its place.  
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I widened the opening of the wound with that caustic medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me. 
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and carefully worked the edges for four months, and then enlarged the wound so that I could put in the forceps and pull it from one side and the other, but it would not come out. 
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments until I made them one day with well-made forceps, according to their shape which will come at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it out and restore the wound.  
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the master judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. 
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your treatment on those which I do not say, for books cannot contain everything. 
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But wise masters compare on very few things, and on those which are present and lacking, they find nine works and nine instruments for the removal of foreign things that happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not leave the limbs where they are lodged except according to two manners: 
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	Either by the place where they enter, or by another part;  
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which leaves further by the place where it enters is an arrow entering their flesh, and it leaves hardly ever now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh around it is rotten, and the exit is clear. 
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it each day. 
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	Then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce around it with a very fine tool until the flesh around it is enlarged, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: 
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not treat it, but leave it until it is equal after several days, for if the arrow reaches as far as the brain, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed further than in the bone alone, and does not reach as far as the synovial cavity, and the patient remains for some days without any ill accident, then you may draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very stuck like this and cannot come out by force, then administer poultices around it, as I have told you. 
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place until it is healthy.  
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in a place in the body so that it cannot be seen, then one must seek it entirely. 
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, remove it with any suitable instrument; 
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot, because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen it until the wound is large; 
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on it by which it is held, then cut away the flesh that is stuck to it in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out. 
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly, even though you do not break the arrow, draw it out more easily. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it be until the sinews around it are ripe, then treat it, for extraction will bring relief.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about wound treatment in its chapter.  
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and place something as you can move to draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; 
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell upon them, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	An arrow that has come from another direction, or where it appears there is something of it, or the skin is swollen in a place where one can see or feel it apparently: 
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut on top, so that the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	if a leap is possible now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.  
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if there is an arrow shaft in it, push it through the whole shaft 
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if it is bone, and you see that the pushing will be difficult, then use an instrument with a point, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the point of the instrument. 
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	Then push it in, and if the arrow is pointed, push the instrument with its point entering inside to make the extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is fitting that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is bone or lead or in the belly or bladder or the side, and it is close, and you can cover over it, then cover it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to cover a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the healing as long as it is healthy. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs with which one treats arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways: 
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the end of the arrowhead is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as this is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps for pushing and for knowing if it is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there are XVI chiefs, namely: 
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two beaters that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; 
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in two apparent temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two tears of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers"; 
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is on the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head of the nose; 
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two gullets that are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; 
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And you see those veins that are under the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly draws blood are five in each arm: 
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and common people call it "the vein of the head"; 
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and common people call it "the vein of the heart"; 
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and common people call it "the vein of the belly," and it is above the ulna bone, and it is the one from which we draw blood, which appears clearly above the hollow. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvation is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: 
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; 
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; 
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The vein that is behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and migraines; 
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of bloodletting, as I have told you, are that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; 
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places hanging from the head; 
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Place your hands on your side, and where you feel the pulse below your side, that is a sign of incision. 
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet and insert it below the vein to the bone. Then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, cutting both the skin and the vein well - it must go through twice - and make the blood flow until you see it. 
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then bind and bandage it tightly until it is healed. 
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And as I have already said in the first book, incision and cautery.  
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The cutting of the two arteries located in the temples is good for old migraines, headaches, and habitual ophthalmia, and for a flow of hot tears. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of bloodletting are as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And this is so that the patient tightens his neck until the two veins appear openly. 
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and they feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then sign to hold. 
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the heart onto the vein at the top with your index finger and insert the lancet beneath it, lift the vein upward, and cut it, just as you did for the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need. 
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then untie the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.  
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed. 
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, which is the beginning of this book.  
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the bleeding of the cephalic for ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness.  
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is such that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears; 
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur," of which this is the form: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the quantity you see; 
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is dry, never leaving the ligature for a long time with a wide flame.  
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the flame should not be too strong; 
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the ligature must not be twisted sideways, because the bone is nearby and it might break if the flame is too thin.  
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Ligating the two veins that are in the temples helps with the eyes, and with tingling, redness, and pain in the face; 
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient tightens his neck by twisting with some cord, as before; 
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the cautery, and whether the cautery is through or long, a peck long and a peck wide, because there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is subtle, it may break; 
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind on cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The cautery of the vein in the nose is good for fever and for strong headache, and for facial ailments such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, even when it is old. 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the cautery is such that the patient tightens his neck, then he pulls his nose to your left hand, and take a long subtle flame, and put it between the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow. 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too far with force, and let it run blood according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is very quickly restored. 
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the flame:  
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sinew of two guindeges helps in the constriction of the urethra, and at the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for itching, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and for estiomenes; 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the sinew is such that the patient tightens their neck under one and the other, as we have said.  
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the masters be standing upon the head of the patient, and the patient sit upon a seat, then sinew the vein along a good distance widely, then draw out blood moderately, or as much as is needed. 
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then redo it on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and remove all the veins moderately, so that the patient doesn't strangle. 
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave him until morning, so that the wound may heal. 
de la sainie des leivres	From the sanctity of books
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The vein of the lips above helps with coal in the mouth and corruption of gums and fissures of the lips and pain and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and remove their collar as I have said; 
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn back the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins: 
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	therefore cut one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and also do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The vein under the tongue helps after the head vein is bled, and it is for the constriction of the throat and diseases of the eye and mouth. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein.  
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Bleed one and then the other, and do not go too deep because underneath are the arteries.  
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arms which we commonly bleed are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Either by striking with a sharp instrument like a lancet or a thin olive-wood tool as sharp as a knife, and it is called an "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins filled with thick blood which appears, and that contain thick and troubled blood. 
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the form of the olive flame: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicately pointed, and it is for cauterizing delicate veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly. 
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is fitting for the healer that he bleeds it well, and that he guards against the artery which is below.  
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is fitting to staunch it, as I have said; 
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame must not be pointed but cutting like a knife.  
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it is fitting that you extract it and change another; 
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	Where you want any vein of it, or you make a vein in place of it on the arm: 
elle apert manifestement;	It opens manifestly; 
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cautery is applied to the flame, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the vein, it is fitting then that you take hold of the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; 
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with a cut, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame; 
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful that you do not strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: 
eschui la donques.	Avoid it then. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protrude upwards as the urine of a child, and its blood is red and thin, know that it is the sinew of an artery:  
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your hand on its length, then remove your hand if it does not stick, which often happens. 
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Bind the arm, and leave it thus, and let the patient not move it. 
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.  
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood is not clotted and it flows, and no medicine is present for you, then bind the artery when it appears, because it is the head of the removal. 
et estainche li sans.	And clot the blood. 
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the next day. 
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the blood clots, that is good.  
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, if the wound cures, as we have said, use powders which clot blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the bandages are not tied too tightly in several ways because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's binding. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle of the arm helps it draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said. 
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful of the nerve that is below and if he pricks too deeply and finds the nerve it will swell and the bloodletting will be tightened and perhaps it cannot heal. 
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve appears many times and if it does not appear in some men because of its subtlety, then you must draw blood from the instrument numb. 
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve as best you can. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The sinew of the cephalic vein helps so much that it draws blood from the head and helps them. 
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is fitting to bleed by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery beneath. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest place, and do not grieve if one misses the first time, and one begins again. 
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance some men's veins swell when pricked for the first time but it does not matter.  
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that it is not administered except to preserve health and to avoid illnesses to come.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins which are these.  
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	That is to say, cephalic, basilic, and median cubital. 
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must bleed at the beginning of spring in young people, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; 
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three on the day. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding which is administered for illnesses has no set time, but only when need be, by day or by night, in all hours and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not fitting to bleed children until 14 years old, nor women carrying a child except from the fourth month until the seventh.  
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Those who have passed sixty years should not bleed themselves.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse their bowels with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines harmful superfluities damaging the principal limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor does he who is too full of meat heal, nor he who is drunk, as long as it lasts, nor those with dropsy. 
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And it worsens one who is treated after colic, fever, discharge from the belly, and frequent intercourse for a woman, and labor, staying awake and fasting, and those who lose their strength, or by something of the weapon or body. 
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtle the humors, if it is thick, by meats and drinks and by medicines, if you have the power. 
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter a bath, if nothing forbids it, to make the blood thinner, and let it bleed from the vein of the left arm near the third rib, as we have said.  
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard yourself that day from work, and straining, and lust, and similar things; 
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be bound and joined, and let the bandages be higher than those on which one is bandaged, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot correct the sinew. 
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	Then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.  
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the bandages with a drop of old oil, then put your index finger of your left hand on that vein below the place where he wants to bandage it, so that the vein does not go and fail when cutting.  
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee as ropes in a bandage, and if there are such ones that are full of windiness, so that when you put on the flame, it withdraws from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among them. 
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, therefore it is fitting that the barbers be informed in these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; 
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, begin again a little lower than that place or higher quickly, if the veins are not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are swollen and the patient is afraid, let it rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: 
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps some abscesses will come; 
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter a bath, then begin the bleeding again if it pleases him; 
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the puncture is small, or the blood runs subtly and you doubt that it will not issue as much blood as you see, stick into that puncture itself with all your might. 
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work quickly so that the veins are swollen; 
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, do not begin the lancing again, and put a poultice of oil on it, for it draws the body's blood, and oil is gentler in this place than lye. 
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the oil poultice to each vein you lance, to staunch the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing makes a triangle and bowl of it, when it is placed on the spot. 
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if the blood is too thin it separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, even when it has not been lanced before except at this time when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put a sponge soaked in hot water and salt on the spot for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been released from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, then do not harm it. 
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, put some aloe or myrrh mixed in calamint juice, mustard, or something similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there are abscesses and swelling at the incision of the basilica: 
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Then put your hand on it, and if you find the area soft when pressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, be careful not to put anything of what we have said on it, for you might cut into an artery by accident. 
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But apply a dry plaster to harden the area, and then treat it with another dressing until it is healed. 
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each one with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; 
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thin; 
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down. 
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the incisions be wide; 
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled a little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking. 
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bleeding is safe from running of blood and cutting of nerves, and is worth more than bleeding that is long or wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body is lacking in bloodletting, it is fitting to give soft bread with pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is hot, draw blood three or four times. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the outflow of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup and uses other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to heal his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to bandage their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong flesh, then they should bandage seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another injury, it must heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and brings fever; 
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening so that it discharges in streams; 
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	after you have observed all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse when he is well, so that death does not come in place of streams, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; 
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not fitting when you see the arm loosen, and make the blood come out the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	and if it is crooked, let him extend his arm quickly, for this would be bad; 
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but leave it until it heals the second time;  
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you put the tip of the flame there, until the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out strong, and place on it a bit of salt recently made into lye, and press lightly on it. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein at the elbow is cut instead of the vein at the temple because it is thicker.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healing is such that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, until the pulse is red. 
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it is bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healing is maintained crosswise, not wide nor long. 
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And the opening should be wide, and it should be healed very close to the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough. 
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is summer, do not put the hand back into hot water at all, for one puts it more in winter than in summer. 
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And this vein's healing is safer than all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve.  
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the salvation vein of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: 
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and plunge it into hot water, until the vein is swollen if you see it. 
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if it deviates sideways, and if you cut it all the way through, it will not matter.  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all naked of flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.  
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and wax on the vein to heal quickly, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sinew of the left hand is worth against the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The vein of the saphenous is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of phlegm, and disease of the kidneys, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient plunges his foot into hot water and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and binds above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and there are many veins that run up above the foot. 
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So bleed from the largest vein, or at the ankle, which is worth more.  
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves underneath, and heal it through as in cutting. 
et soit li flaimes anesil.	Let the flame be extinguished. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back in the water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the cautery fails the first time, begin the second a little higher up, for the flesh is salty. 
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and so do the same to the saphenous vein of the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone, and its pain is worth the pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its cautery is that the patient enters a bath and squeezes above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open. 
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, cauterize it in all ways that you can and crosswise.  
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth more for you to cut it, for the flesh is dry and it is much replenished by most men. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, look for no vein that appears or back of the foot, and toward the little toe, and beware of the nerves; 
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And draw as much blood as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on it and remove it; 
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	from cupping glasses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cups are made of horn, or of ivy, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is done in two ways: 
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting. 
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping which is done without cutting is according to two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Either it is with all fire, or without fire; 
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And cupping which is done by cutting and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is all over the head; 
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are hammered onto the neck; 
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others on both sides of the neck; 
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass below the chin;  
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cupping glass on both shoulders; 
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glass on the loins; 
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses hammered onto both arms;  
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cupping glasses on both legs; 
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cupping glasses on both ankles; 
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken anyone, as one does when bleeding from a vein; 
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, neither with much heat nor little heat, in any illness that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it is necessary due to illness to apply cupping, or for custom, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time. 
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; 
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And there are some who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness as well; 
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; 
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are some who faint, and see by night blood and sorrow and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is less than a month old, we order him to be cupped after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The juice of the mulberry helps with the heaviness of the head ... that comes from it, and it is not right for this to be after the evacuation of all the body; 
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this cupping is done in place of the bleeding from the head veins, and it is not suitable for those of cold complexion to use, or who have diarrhea, for it does them great harm. 
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have or primarily cold diseases.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often become stiff, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower because of the risk of stiffness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Cupping on the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and the basilica vein, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the breast, and for the rupture of the anal canal, and for all coughs, and for repletion. 
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is not good to leave it on too long, for if it holds too tightly it can cause prolapse or obstruction of the stomach and the heart.  
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Cupping on the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of bleeding from the basilica vein.  
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary that you order the patient to press his hand at its placement so that he does not strike the artery and blood does not flow. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	Cupping below the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and decay of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; 
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is placed on the two lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	Cupping on the thighs is as good as three veins in the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins; 
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and order the patient not to make too much effort, for the flesh is thin and under it are nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cup placed on the rump is good for hemorrhoids in the buttocks and illnesses below, and it is necessary that the cup be large, and be made of horn, so that it draws well; 
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break 
et i fai grans plaies.	and it would make large wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses on the legs bleed freely because they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the loins, and of the bladder, and soften inflammations.  
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are placed on the two thighs and the two ankles; moreover, they weaken the body after a long time, and cause emaciation in several conditions.  
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply a cupping glass is that you first put it empty and suck gently, then place it quickly and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and see the redness of the blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then let it rest and put the cupping glasses back on, and take care in the disposition of bodies, because there are some who have thick flesh and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a deep puncture; 
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly. 
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: 
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to make subtle the way of thick blood.  
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; 
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we only make one incision.  
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart; 
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, we strike deep, and the end is that the heart be pierced only slightly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have few pores, that you moisten the rims of the cups with oil that is stimulating and dissolving: 
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is so, with oil of violets, or with oil of sweet almonds, or with oil of pumpkin seed; 
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in winter, with oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balm, or oil of anise, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person whom one heals has tender flesh and large pores, it is not fitting to put any oil on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or water of blackthorn, or water of pumpkin, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, should rise with rosemary, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large superfluities may rise with old wine, or vinegar water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones; 
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; 
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he washes himself when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are being treated if they are choleric, and if the skin is too raw and inflamed;  
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is fitting that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in the summer, and similar things 
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little, and meat from a young animal, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine midway between old and new, and eat little, and eat little and small birds and pigeons; 
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he will bleed, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is fitting to give some men at times three-spice or nutmeg before the bleeding, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; 
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the wine be subtle, but it does not suit those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses that are put without cutting are those that are put on the liver, and on the thigh, and gout, and on the belly and the buttocks and the loins and the hip, for these members do not suffer to be cut on them, and we only do it for attracting blood from one member to another, just as we put them on the breasts when a newborn bleeds; 
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the shoulder to reduce the limb; 
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an inflammation or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the inflammation, or dislodges the stone from its place. 
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And it does so when you put it on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to only suck. 
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water, as in illnesses of the pleura, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or hot water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two widths and a half palm of length, and has at the cost side around the middle a small hole, as for putting in a needle, and is made of horn, smooth beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placing it on the limb; 
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have a rod of wood or iron in the middle, to put a candle holder on it, and they are big and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them 
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses for children are different than those for the old, and for the thin than for the fat.  
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus put this cupping glass upon the limb: 
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the candle holder of wax or linen, and put it through the cupping glass through the rod which is in the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient; 
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it upon the limb, and your two hands must be upon the part that we have said, so that when you want to remove it, if the steam goes out, one takes off the cupping glass
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the linen as before and start again often, if you need to. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	For the cupping glass which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, for all acute conditions, it has neither a stem nor a perforation, and is only applied when full of water, and is placed upon the limb only. 
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Cupping glasses are only applied to limbs where one cannot apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. 
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in those places devoid of flesh, such as the bone or nails, and other similar ones. 
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the cupping glass is such that when you find cupping glasses which are in a sweet and clear liquid without any impurity, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And place them for one night in a sweet liquid, so that they become familiar and have nothing inside their bellies. 
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then let it be bled by vein and cupping glass, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on bandages. 
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and begin to shrink, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it on, for this is worth much afterward. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place gently, and then sharply, very well, and then splint it. 
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the bandages become too tight after the body swells under them, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top until the bandages are loosened. 
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are many bandages, put powdered vitriol or alum, and similar things on top until they loosen. 
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you can place half a handful of peeled beans on the spot and leave them until they burn there, this will stop it now. 
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other herbs. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the herbs do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn; 
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling off, powder a piece of aloe and salt crushed up, or ashes, then they will fall off now. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, young son, that the crazy things I write in this chapter, you will never see them in any of the old books, nor read about them in letters; 
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange in our land, because I never found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I don't know anything else except by the knowledge of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated them with science, and through experimentation, and through the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two previous chapters. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting then that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and stays upon virtue, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age;  
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the time is very bad, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid cold foods, that is to say cold stews, and broth of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb; 
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to his first government which he had used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourish the patient with foods that promote fattening, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and peas, and veal feet, and cow's udder, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at half breaking it can return to its place more quickly than a fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children; 
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but have no care, set upon the broken bone large splints which bind and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not stop his work, and for this, it is necessary to nourish him with large meats as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to splintering, and others to sharpening, just as the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every manner, let him have his engine and his own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the bone is broken because the limb is twisted, and appears clearly by itself, and makes a sound when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is neither crookedness nor sound at the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture. 
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But there may well be crookedness, or a crack, or a small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not fitting that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come hereafter, and then now subtly extract it.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which goes in a direction, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary now to put them back together equally, just as boils heal. 
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if a boil comes hot, let it be left alone for a day, until the boil is calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it equal to the pus that you can lightly and gently draw out, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces.  
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then remove it, as is appropriate afterward. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it is an arm or leg, or at the hand, if it is a small limb, or two tendons, or one tendon and at the hand; 
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the limb are freed, you will reset all additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient. 
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and properly adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:  
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it is set well, do not force it too much, nor press as those who cause boils, heat and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have often seen. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is set properly, warn the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and be sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. 
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And be careful that he is placed straight so that crookedness does not occur when it is being restored. 
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and severity.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: 
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: 
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and restrain it equally on all sides so that there is no indentation. 
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie on top light strips of linen, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a bit on all the bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less so that the break is then moved away a little from the break. 
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament bit by bit, until you grasp a large portion of the healthy area, then take hold of the other ligament and turn it back around over the broken area 
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and extract it moderately, neither too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first place above; 
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the ligaments strips of linen or cloths, as long as they are all equal, then bind everything above with bandages, and then apply your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing and hot on it to remove the swelling, and leave it like that for several days; 
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then remove your splints, and they should be half the width of a walking stick, or made of wood from which shingles are made, or palm ribs, and they should be according to this shape: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is fitting that the star that one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others 
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should also be as long as is fitting for the limb, whether small or large; 
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then remove it from the stars as you did in the first hour, then tie a thread over it neatly, as was done in the first hour on the fracture; 
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is bound, the less pain there will be; 
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is fitting that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;  
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures with twisted linen cord, it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not fitting that there be less than two fingerbreadths of space between each star. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore from the heads of the bones after tightening them in their joints, put under them cloths of flax, or wool scraps, so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say its cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put strong splints on before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the hot abscess which appears; 
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And see here this manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: 
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take flour which clings to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and make this mixture neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, for this is the common way to make a plaster for restoring fractures in many positions, as well for women as for young children, for it is not too harsh nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way to make a plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: 
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take 3 drachms of frankincense, myrrh, and asafoetida, and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 drachms.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Myrrh and aloes, each five drachms. 
alechil VIIII З.;	Alkanet, nine drachms. 
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make them into powder, and mix them with the white of an egg;  
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and is worth much to many men.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another kind of plaster that is good for sprains: 
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and betony, each ten drachms.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Myrrh and aloes, each nine drachms. 
acaice VI З.;	Agrimony six drachms.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boiled Armenian bole ten drachms, and grind well, and cook with vinegar or the white of an egg, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another kind of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, to ease pain arising, and they use this plaster on the bone and break. 
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new linen cloth, and moisten it with oil and boiled oil, and place it on the area. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for calming a hot abscess, and properly removes pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: 
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and common poppy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and to soften the remnant of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part; 
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind it, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or plain water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another kind of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take marshmallow root, flax seed, betony, melilot, and tansy, and violet flowers and chamomile flowers, of all one part; 
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind it, and steep with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that one must put on the broken limb, to restore things dry a hot poultice, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of plaster which is good for injury and pain: 
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and horsehair cut off, or bird feathers, and visnaga, and grind them equally, and make a plaster and bind it. 
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then unbind it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place;  
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not, do not unbind it for several days. 
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or lack of rest or swelling, then hurry and unbind it, and remove the plaster now; 
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light linen cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is calmed;  
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen on top, soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it over a bandage, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle binding, and apply a bit of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before. 
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and subtly until it is healed.  
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess grows and reddens and has pain and swelling is gone entirely, and you need plaster and bandage, if it starts again as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb from what we have said, do not unbind it for more than three days or four or five or seven. 
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never leave it for twenty days, according to what you see, until the fracture heals and approaches the adjustment of the flesh. 
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Then restrain more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before. 
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the place drying up more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come.  
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Therefore apply a hot compress, every time you unbind it, and this be every third day, and loosen the bandage a bit. 
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this work therefore cut the bindings on the limb, and quickly amend what the foolish mirror does, that twists the limb back again.  
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is evil, and if the work is dangerous, I see no other thing than to let it be and do it straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of fractures, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined.  
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures that are made from the percussion of a sword, and the neck breaks all the bone up to the sinew that is beneath the bone, as a hatchet or club does.  
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And because of this, this manner of fracture is called “hatchet blow." 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword strikes the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And the wound from these two fractures is large or small.  
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or a crack, or chips of stone, or a chair on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture penetrating close to the membrane which is under the bone, or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if a wound that is rejoined to the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary"; 
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or by falling, or by a similar thing, and it causes the piece of bone to go down, and the edges are shaved like the way blacksmiths shave when they sharpen on anvils; 
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone enters inside.  
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft bones, such as children's skulls; 
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are separated like tiles. 
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and inquiry with probes, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The likeness of hair is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs strongly upon it, if the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the patient's conditions, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, spasms, pallor, fever with chills, and the eyes coming out and reddening, and other similar things in various states, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeless situation, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nettle rash first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the time that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone is corrupted, and accidents come as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus: 
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take the head of the sick person nearby and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can and above the figure of the wound more often than you can and if discharge of blood comes to uncovering the bone or abscess forms, then help him with what is necessary and it is that you fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; 
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess forms are appeased and be sure of discharge of blood; 
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two manners of work: 
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one manner is if you cut a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I put another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is if you have a number of diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and are of hard iron.  
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And work lightly so that you do not bruise the head. 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with chisels, but make sure they do not pierce beyond the bone of the tester, and it must have a margin or circle on top so that the point does not pass beyond the bone. 
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you must have several of them so that each one comes into its place according to the type of bone, so that you have chisels for all types. 
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three kinds of chisels: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know the bone is pierced. 
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the chisel in another place a little after and do the same all around, then cut with chisels the space of bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers; 
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and guard that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is fitting that you restore the instrument which has remained from the bone to all the other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more slender and more subtle than the other incisor.  
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then gently remove them with instruments. 
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other manner of working is that which Galien mentions, which is safer;  
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it very highly, and that is his word. 
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lentiform incision tool, which has this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, but divide the part into two sides so that the cutting is towards the bone.  
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike lightly with a small mallet on top so that you gently tap the bone all around and be careful of the cloth underneath. 
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is near the bone, strike lightly, for one can strike the bone well without harm and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the cloth, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must grind behind that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor which you must have in various quantities, so as to administer the most suitable one in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you shave before with great razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease to do this until it is good.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other delicate cuttings and breaks, it is fitting that you administer aid according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that cannot be answered by one who has not put their study into this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the break is exposed, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it upon the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not strain the suture then apply another bandage over it and do not bind it too tightly just enough to hold the wound; 
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided then untie it and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, birthwort, and similar things 
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make a powder from these things and put it on the wound and then apply cleansing medicines without biting. 
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and make sure the wound is always clean and do not leave any ointment on it nor allow pus to gather because when pus collects on the bandage covering the brain it will run and harden and cause the patient great harm;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you put something biting on the suture it irritates it above.  
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come except for the medicine that has been put on it, so that its virtue may have effect, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in this glue one cloth and lay it upon the surface. 
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it in ways that are fitting until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it heals. 
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you bind your little finger or thumb to the nose and put the broken part equally inside your index finger, and in the pouch by force, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot come back into place, then you must put it equal to the head of a nail, a large prick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, redo it in the same way, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; 
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess that has formed is calmed, then bind at the head of the two ends with linen cloths, if the break is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bind the other side, if the break is there; 
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the bone.  
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some healers say that one must soften the bandages with butter and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem right to me, but it is necessary that they are softened in a mixture of egg yolk and mill dust;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And at no time should one put goose feathers in place of tents, and if a cloth bandage is wrapped around it, hold the fracture, and let the patient breathe. 
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do what you see fit. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come up while you are working on them, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a drop of diammonium.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not come to a head, apply a plaster made from chickpea flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg white, then place it on light cloths, and do not bind it tightly. 
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then stitch the wound and treat it with things that promote healing flesh and bones, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this. 
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the bone, treat it with tents and apply splints of wood until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only superficial, and not broken in two, but pushed inward, so a connoisseur can slightly recognize it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; 
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger and gently push the fracture inward, and hold it with the other hand by pressing, and set it equal. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, so that it is equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or breakage, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth on top; 
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on top of the cloth a large well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it up at the points that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.  
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; 
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put plaster on top, made from flour from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour after you have removed the cerumen. 
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put light wool on top of the plaster, and if the plasters dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; 
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	It is often healed in three weeks. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, do as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, see that no part of the bone is removed;  
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if you are removing it subtly, use suitable instruments for this. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is wide, and put on it bandages suitable for that, to promote flesh, until it is healed.
de la forcele	Of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The clavicle breaks several times in front of the shoulder and the fracture can be in three ways: 
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	either it is broken and detached into two, with fragments, and this is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the broken bone is. 
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the side. 
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then set the fracture to your liking, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor protrusion. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need. 
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And extend and lift the broken bone, and remove the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder back out because it has come in perfectly, then it is fitting that the patient lies often on his backside, and puts under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have the assistants push the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then straighten the fracture to your liking, and if you find it broken apart, it is necessary that you cleave open. 
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and treat the parts lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any pressure, then use the blade of one of your incisors. 
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put under it this instrument, to hold the joint:  
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp, and should be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;  
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two jaws, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, as is the break in the wound that you made when treating the bones.  
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the hot abscess, if the wound is large and the break is small or if you doubt the hot abscess, then cover the wound with bandages and splints, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fractures, is that you put on the bone a plaster of flour from the mill and egg yolk, and put light cloths on top, and put a splint below the armpit if you need it. 
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put two layers of linen on the cloths and plaster; 
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a slender splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down;  
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the splint on the fracture, and wind the bandage up the neck, and below the healthy armpit, and below the injured armpit; 
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And bind each part well, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the splint does not move on the broken bone, then leave it alone for a day, and when the bandages loosen, retighten them; 
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small bolster under the armpit to raise the shoulder. 
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if it lightens the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, then you bind his arm to his neck and do not untie it until 20 days have passed so that no evil accident occurs.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then you begin the plaster again, if you see he needs it, and take it off and leave it like that until he is restored. 
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it is restored at most in 28 days, and less for some men.  
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or dislocates so badly that it cannot be set straight except by touch. 
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If you set the limb according to the shape of the fracture and reset it according to its natural form in all ways that you can. 
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg white, and light bandages, and put a double cloth on top. 
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on a wide and fine splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if below the splint there is hair in any place of the shoulder, use that hair as a bandage of linen, so that the splint sits evenly. 
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then bind it all tightly with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and examine the binding each day.  
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it loosens, bind it again and set the splint equally if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on their side. 
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25. 
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is fulfilled, untie it and be sure, for it is not bone that moves lightly. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out before, and not below the heart, then lift it up, and bind it with splints, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in two, but this rarely happens. 
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks at the ends. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken below, it declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and everything else, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the hair in the broken bones, and they see it well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses on the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with his hands, and subtly tries to make them equal in all ways as much as he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; 
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then he puts on plasters and bandages above the bone with a fine powder of salt or some other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth and ties it over the broken bone so that it does not move. 
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And he turns the bandage around the back and removes it carefully, and examines the bandage every hour and if it is loosened, he tightens it.  
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to loosen it, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come there in ways of healing. 
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the plaster and remove it until it is healed.  
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in their thickness after the back, and they only bend because they are slippery; 
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one feels it well upon inquiry as it should be.  
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the break straight as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a plaster, and remove it with a spatula, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is inward sloping, the patient feels great pain and pressure, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. 
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it sweats profusely, and he coughs up a large amount of blood, and this is dangerous illness, and the ancients have put much effort into it. 
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, in order to drive out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, so that hot abscesses may not come, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if there has come, so he is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that one puts cupping glasses on the place to suck out the pus, and it seems reasonable.  
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw the superfluities to the place because of the weakness. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say one should cover the place with linen moistened in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even, then it is cured by the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone which points at the cloth, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under the instrument to keep the syringe. 
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone and drain it slightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if boils come out, put on cloths moistened in rose oil, and place them on the area. 
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the place of that which it belongs to an abscess, and let it lie often on the side where it should be until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a bone fracture occurs at the neck, and sometimes it rains. 
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back. 
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take care if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are extracted and do not move, know that the junction of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, see if its flesh is softened, and if the accidents are in hands, and on the back there is flatulence and discharge without volition; 
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one turns it on its stomach, if there is discharge without volition.  
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and he wants to get up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal: 
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if one does not labor in its cure. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this mishap does not befall him, the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you consider if there is a hot abscess, if you put rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is appeased; 
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. 
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. 
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bones are broken, it is fitting to cover them over the heart;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with ointment that hardens flesh, until it is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your left hand pouch under it and set it equal to the other hand with your power, then apply the plaster and splint on top, if you need them. 
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then remove it, and if there are broken bones, set them, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.  
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there would only be a slight reduction in height at the head; 
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and extending along its length, and sloping downwards, and coming to the patient with pain in the area, and tingling, and swelling where it is broken. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as far as you are above the fracture;  
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which is the fracture and its shape; 
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is only at the head, you put that fracture back together, as long as it is in its natural shape.  
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inwards, then make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that break appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have put it back together equally, put plaster on it, then put a splint of wood or horn on top, and immobilize the fracture so that it does not move; 
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the place below the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a boil comes, do not touch it, until the boil is calmed down, and put what we have said before on it; 
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and remove it as is appropriate, if there is no bad accident; 
et c’est li maniere.	and that is the way. 
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of two ways: 
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a smooth stick of medium thickness, according to this form: 
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two ends with two ties, and hang them up high, and place the patient on a seat;  
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then let the patient's arm be broken on a stick, until it reaches the armpit, and put a bend in the stick, then lean it on some heavy object or have someone hold it down. 
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the splints at the break so that they are equal in both hands, as long as the break returns to its proper position. 
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one sets the patient on their back, and ties their hand to their neck, then commands two ministers that one hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all the ligature, and each extends at his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put one splint below the armpit and the other towards the elbow, below the break. 
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And also if the break is towards the elbow, it is necessary to put a splint lightly, without effort, as long as the break is equal on the place and on the elbow.  
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the break equally, as it should be, and remove it, if no abscess comes. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if a boil comes, do not extract it until seven days have passed, and place softened linen soaked in rose oil upon it until the boil is soothed. 
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put a plaster on the breaking point, then bind the arm onto the shoulder joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast. 
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And place the cloth, and extract it on the shoulder joint, and on the arm so that the arm is in its proper place, if nothing hinders it, or if no bone is moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone might move, then use splints and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have two finger spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three finger widths on each side. 
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then pull on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, stronger and less distant. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the seat of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to be tied until the seventh day, as we have said. 
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at the bandage every three days, so that itching does not occur, or swelling comes to the place, where the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if none of these accidents come, do not untie it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach. 
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And put a cushion of plain wool equally under the shoulder, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the bandages are loosened. 
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If it is treated by the power of medicine, and given the meat we have mentioned before in part so that the meat is first subtle; 
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when it begins to regain strength, let it be thick. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in 40 days altogether;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must untie them and administer baths and ointments for healing the place. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and obstructed, it will remain for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", one of which is small, and this is the one that enters the shoulder socket.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is large, and this is the one that is below, towards the little finger. 
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes only the large humerus breaks, or only the small one, and sometimes both together.  
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing. 
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when large bones are broken, healing is difficult, and more grievous than when they are broken together as one. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it is necessary to gently extend it, and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large bone, it is necessary to bind it tighter; 
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher up so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the minister's arm below his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the sights equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any that is detached so that it holds onto the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before, on bone and sinew.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if there is a break with a wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter.
si pren la cure.	If you take the care. 
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the restoration boils arise, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft. 
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And bind the poultice on subtly, until the boils are soothed.  
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg yolks, then place the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger now, and a little wider than the others. 
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that it should have six splints or braces in several positions: 
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two. 
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And apply more pressure above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. 
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the cloths that are upon the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; 
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And watch over the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is fitting that you wash the limb with hot water, until the itching is appeased; 
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be tightly bound while resting. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone loosened, and similar things, if so address.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you are careful so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb, because it is too narrow, then you must soften it a little and leave it like that for several days, until the nourishment comes, and then remove it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things which we have said happen to the patient, do not loosen it for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	When you are bandaging, then let him keep his hands at his neck, and let his collars be equal, and let him beware of movement and shaking, and let him sleep on his back; 
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the constitutions and complexions of the humors. 
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and like us we have two fingers which have a bit of splintering, and there is nothing else but weeping many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit upright and straight in front of him equally; 
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then put his hand on the table extended, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equally the benchmarks, as long as they are well joined; 
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; 
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and it is wrapped in a linen cloth. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the base around the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to squeeze it onto his broken palm; 
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then strain it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of hard wood as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it is necessary. 
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is below, it is fitting that you place a splint above and another below on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand and bind the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of our bones, it is the one that pushes out, then he must set it equal as it should be. 
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And he extracts it with the palm, and if you see it put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and it does not move. 
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is in other bones, such as the index finger or one of the others, then he sets it equal and binds it with the healthy bone that is next to it. 
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you bind them all together, as much as they are worth, or you put them on a splint, such as a pouch.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and cure those who come to you, as I have said.  
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; 
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration is one ties above the fracture, and another below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his tie to his own part equally; 
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is near the bone. 
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, one of the bandages should be towards the hip, and the other bandages below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the ties be below the knee, and let the extension be downward; 
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then place the splints against the bone equal to his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then put on the plaster, and the tie, if abscesses do not appear. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and your care;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The binding is done in a partial manner. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it on the fracture with a bandage doubled two or three times, and leave the excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread above; 
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn the bandage on the leg and thigh, then put splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; 
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to make the constriction even, then begin to tie three or four turns on the fracture; 
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further up the fracture, tighten it less; 
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above it, then go back down to the head of the thread until you reach below the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, then so that there comes neither an abscess nor swelling nor any other such thing. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens and it loosens, and corrects what comes, as we have said many times;  
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, it must be removed if possible; 
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it is not possible, it is necessary to split the area and draw out force; 
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And when the thigh is broken in this way, one puts splints on it as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	in all ways, the patient does not sound a bell when restoration is done like this. 
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee hollow
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that on the street of the knee there is often no fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is but a crack or a hole, and occurs in every wound, and in every wound, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And restoration is done when one puts together what is broken with its due parts, as long as it can be assembled and moved. 
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply a plaster, and put a round splint if needed, and remove it as appropriate. Then observe all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscess cautery and other similar things. 
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply to each injury what is appropriate until it is healed.  
de la brisure de la jambe	of a leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "musculus" and the other is called "fibula". 
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And all other fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for this reason, restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the operations are the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bones are broken, turn them forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then there is great pain, and it is clearly seen. 
et torne desoz.	and turns downward.  
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and tie the splints evenly; 
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nevertheless, if the break is severe, and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; 
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the alignment according to your skill. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed all your work, take two bandages of unbleached linen that can cover the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down; 
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them around twice above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and at this binding the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; 
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer herbs of the length of the leg, and if it is wood, and he puts it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture where there is a wound 
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or another incident; 
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the healer so much as he is healthy. 
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	There is no fracture at the ankle, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and there are two possibilities, and there are no other conditions except in several positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that a bone in the foot is broken, and you see these bones rise against each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot now on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so much that they return to their places; 
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put the plaster and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board with two inches thick, then straighten the foot carefully, and after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two bones are broken, then restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand. 
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and make it a little wider, then put the footboard under that splint as I have said, and bind it tightly. 
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then put a splint on each bone according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the splint under the foot. 
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be resting on the top of the splint above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.  
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have already discussed. 
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each injury according to its needs.  
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone by the dagger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of a woman by nature is broken, make her sit enlarged, then incline her to the back part, and let her be held from behind. 
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the hollow of the patient's nature with cotton, and put in it as large as I stand. 
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then raise the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton jumps, as far as it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the stick. 
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and thus do for seven days or so.  
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	Then the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of a lamb, and tie to the opening a cane, and insert the whole bladder into the nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the cane, so that the bladder swells inside. 
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will heal the fracture; 
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for several days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of a man or woman's shoulder is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; 
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and use, and understand my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates in several positions the right way of restoration: 
enten le donques.	understand then. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cleansed now, so that the cleansings which we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, and you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, so that abscesses do not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes there, leave the restoration until a new day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you will cause bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the chest uncovered, it is fitting that you set it straight lightly with your hands, with little extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear to you to put it evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; 
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to grasp three or four, according to what he needs in each treatment of a fracture 
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and one thick piece so that it does not fold under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this: 
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "splint", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the top of the visible bone; 
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the end at one time, so that it returns to its place, and is equal on both sides.  
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, if the edge of a suitable instrument for this, either an incision knife or saw, is at your disposal;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters. 
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do as much as you can so that it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black balsamic vinegar, and do this properly if it is summer. 
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not put any wax or anything else on the wound that has oil, lest it cause decay and corruption. 
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and put a covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not strained with the break.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times this has been done foolishly, and has brought death or corrosion upon the patient sometimes. 
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the binding be looser and softer than for other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents might come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not right to put on splints.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But wrap around it, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and bind them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the gut in the wound begins to move, remove what you have put on it with all wine, and apply healing ointment, such as Tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be aligned in such a way that the bone runs down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it passes and it cannot be soldered but continually bows back, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must want the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or some other manner of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and appears on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it at all, for many times death comes, but leave it until it rots.  
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	It may fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of burns that come from solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	It often happens after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a sorry thing to see the shape of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.  
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore be careful if it is fresh to us: 
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If he administers astringent medicines, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with the white of an egg or with oil; 
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	And put them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind it in any way.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	And then loosen it, and begin another one, until the swelling is removed; 
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	Or you bind on a well-made piece of linen;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	For the property of linen is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; 
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, apply a cup over it, and make the excess appear; 
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Where you shave it with any razor, until it is removed, and heal it until it is cured. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is restored and the limbs remain weak and delicate afterwards, it happens for many reasons. 
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	One reason is because it was tied too tightly and was not bound as it should have been.  
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there were too many bandages, and nourishment could not reach the limb. 
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or because of a great deal of agitation.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or for too much movement at the wrong time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because he has little blood in his body and is therefore weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften his body, so that his blood is multiplied within him. 
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and he administers a bath, and gives him joy and relief; 
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then he puts pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out great numbness, and he often warms it with hot water, until the numbness goes away from the limb; 
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and it returns to its natural shape. 
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a crooked limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: 
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many a fool has done this in our land; 
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and it leads to great evils, and by chance death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the nodules and the tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be warmed with hot water, or soft herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; 
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with gelatin fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; 
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fatty figs, and crush them with bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling. 
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the crookedness is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron, then carefully cut to the bone with a fine chisel. 
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply caution and diligence in the treatment. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, it must now be brought back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if you delay, the flesh will swell, and it may be put back in its place with difficulty; 
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	therefore it is not right to move it while it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times it brings forth spasm and other pains; 
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	In any case, when this happens, if you make the patient well, then leave him alone until the abscesses are appeased; 
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as it comes into its place.  
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It sometimes happens that both jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: 
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are at one time removed from their places, and softened a little bit;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated and hang toward the chin, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.  
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through several manipulations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay; 
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put the point of a mirror into the root of the jaw dislocation in the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; 
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be free, to put it equal; 
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.  
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let him look at the same spot until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reduction is difficult, even if both jaws are together, apply hot water and oil until they soften slightly;  
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay the reduction as we have said. 
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reduced evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, put soft cloths dipped in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages; 
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient lie on his back, and his shoulders be placed between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor does he try to raise himself, but takes light food, as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are bound; 
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not work at opening his mouth to eat or drink, as long as the jaw is well bound and clean. 
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their places, fever and accustomed colds will come, and possibly loosening of the belly, and possibly vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is lost; 
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times they died in nine days. 
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The cautery cannot dislocate from within the continuation of the leg and foot, and it is dislocated sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; 
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place with your palm, and it will return;  
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it; 
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the head which is towards the knife cannot dislocate; 
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If it does, and if it dislocates sometimes, reset it in its place, as we have said; 
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; 
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in the same way, reset the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.  
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three manners: 
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	Of which one is when it dislocates at the part of the armpit below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second is at the part of the breast; 
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance it dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate it behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate it inwards for the nerves; 
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and many times dislocate it downwards towards the armpit, especially for those who have a short neck, for this salt must be forced quickly; 
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	for those who have enough neck, the salt is taken with difficulty, and put back in with difficulty.  
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it sometimes happens that some men experience a bruise or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of it.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore it behoves you to test it until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment. 
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the armpit and puts a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear diversity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit at the buttock the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone. 
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot return his hand to its place, nor move it in any way; 
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated at the top, unless it is hidden, for you will find it manifestly by touch; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation is not very difficult to reset, when it is new, or if the child's arm is ill. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then puts your fingers under the armpit, and lifts the joint forcefully upwards to its place; 
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the attendant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it underneath;  
si venra hastanment.	it will come quickly. 
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within three days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; 
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And give him a softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of marshmallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied. 
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then have the patient lie on his back, and put under the armpit a cloth of wool neither too soft nor too hard. Then place the mires (a kind of bandage) with the patient's heel on the cloth, and gently lift the head of the shoulder, and pull the patient’s hand; 
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another assistant should hold the patient’s head so that it does not move down.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	This shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see that the resetting according to this manner 
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and have a man larger than the patient present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And he should stand straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs by the arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another minister will pull the patient's hand down towards their belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And one can reset it in another way: 
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and this is done by sticking a long iron rod into the ground, whose head should be as round as a pestle, and not too thick nor too thin;  
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft cloths underneath, and the patient should lie lengthwise along the wood; 
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then their hand should be extended downwards on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place; 
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return because of all these things that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take an iron rod two arm lengths long and four inches wide, which has a round head to easily enter underneath the armpit, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then lay upon the head of the wound cloths underneath so that the wound does not bleed on the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient. 
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	Extend some arm upon the wood of length, and tie the shoulder upon the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm upon the shoulder-blade of a ladder of width, and let the hand be extended downwards, and let the body hang down on the other side: 
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint will return to its place while being held. 
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a sphere of equal wool under the shoulder, then apply plaster mixed with powdered mill flour, incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it. Then tighten it under the shoulder carefully and turn the bandage on top of the plaster, embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is fitting that he rests a bit, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; 
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days, and move it;  
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or some other cause, you must administer cauteries at three points, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it loosens after VII days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm up, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. 
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And know that the joint was never fixed in its place. 
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the back, and the breasts, or buttocks, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and administered in another place.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it as long as it is healthy. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slow movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until the stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation, what is done.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at points, and at points it returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And if it is dislocated from all sides, and the same in front and behind, and the dislocation is not answered, for one sees it well and feels it well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and it dislocates according to each shape. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick knife with the healthy one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is lifted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it so that abscesses do not come, for if abscesses were to come, it would be harmful to reset. 
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back; 
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and by chance death may come. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration, when it is such that you can reset it, is done by extending your hand with both hands.  
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms should be spread, and both hands should look according to the turn of the wound, above and below, and push the joint into its socket, or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forward, it returns when he doubles his hand onto his hand, and touches the root of the palm or the costal which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; 
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and when the minister extends the arm, and holds it so that it does not move during the extension. 
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;  
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, if oil is needed to soften the joint, then push the joint into place, until it returns. 
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put dry plaster with egg yolk on top and bind it firmly, then rest the arm against the patient's neck and leave it for several days, then unbind it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it.  
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not set well, start the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like this for several days until it is firmly in place. 
puis le deslie.	Then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved. 
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or put a fatty sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then bone it, and make it enter the bath. 
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then put the wool back on and then enter the bath.  
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this two or three times until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see it, put cow dung moistened with heated butter on it, and bind it up. 
si revenra a sa disposition.	It will return to its position. 
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easier than that of other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to quickly return it to its place, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the flesh does not swell or become hot with an abscess. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return is done so that you put the ailing hand on a table and extend the fingers of the hand; then look at it and align it evenly, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint and pushes it until it returns.  
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; 
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for stretching and pulling. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the doctor put his hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good. 
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply soothing poultices for abscesses and leave it thus without restarting. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint will remain crooked; 
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it does not harm the patient further than that his hand is weakened and he cannot grasp anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; 
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy than to burn it with a cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will do.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some pain, then apply hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the two bones of the hand are dislocated in each direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the belly; 
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then hold the pain, and push the dislocation towards your pouches as much as it returns, then support the head of the joint, and bend it towards the part where it is separated; 
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day;  
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind it at night as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it at night; 
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and also do this if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed. 
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.  
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Concerning the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that movements jump strong without will, and he cannot hold them, and many times some limb is softened, whether it be both thighs or both arms or one. 
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shinbone is broken into four parts; 
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which breaks in the back is called "gilbositez" 
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that you will consider if the gilbositez came from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is neither cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of treatment are said in great words, where there is not much profit in all;  
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that for the gilbositez which comes at the front of the foot, there is neither remedy nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say. 
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is necessary that the patient be laid flat on his face in an even place, and have a support underneath him so he does not blanch. 
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place one coal at the head in earth form, and the other at his feet, and tie a strap under the patient's buttocks, and another at his thighs, and at his shins, and at his ankles. 
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two assistants should hold the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two coals. 
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they should be well secured, the coals as we have said, and the healer should place his palms on the spine, in a straight line, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board three arm's lengths long, and place it under the wall, and have the patient lie on his side, and push his head from the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine. 
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put your feet on the other end of the table, and press hard, until it returns to its place; 
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see it, do it with the screw that turns the hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And place two embers at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, and between each ember, above and below, a palm's breadth in length. 
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And make a hole in each ember where the screw runs, and set the embers firmly in the ground so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each two embers place a turning ember, with which the limbs turn, and place in the two turning embers two small embers a palm's length long to turn the screw.  
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the cord which is among the splints to the screw towards the head, and the other cord to the screw towards the feet, and each of the assistants turns his screw on the whole cord, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on them with plenty of egg, and then bandages, and then the stele of a tablet three fingers long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the vertebra, then tie it with a linen cloth, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed. 
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have said before. 
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a plum stone, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation.  
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have presumption. 
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance death might come. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place by dislocations, not in the same way as the other joints. 
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:  
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inward and outward, and in front and behind. 
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more inward than others, and rarely dislocated in front and behind.  
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of this inward dislocation is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire. 
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And there is a swelling below like a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.   
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who is coming to death is if this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has it beforehand, if they are well their leg according to its completion. 
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, do not bend the knee twice without pain, and if one wants to make it go, it cannot beforehand, and it retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it goes, it passes on the heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of someone who has it behind are that he cannot straighten his knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the angle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at a place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reduction of this kind of dislocation is such that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it stays according to its disposition, there is no cure. 
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not fitting for him to have presumption.  
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of four manners of dislocation, hasten yourself so that you return the joint, and extend it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left. 
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return, and needs no other remedy.  
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage tied above the knee; 
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another assistant extends his hand on top in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it tightly with a rope above the thigh; 
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head of the rope; 
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, then it is necessary to treat it in a similar manner. 
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the thigh, it is necessary that you lay the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the groin, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the knee-cap; 
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another minister and have him embrace the thick part of the sick person's thigh with his arms, and extend it towards the fire. 
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	It will now return to its place. 
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this method of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is fitting that you bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong band, tightly above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fists more than the others; 
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it is hung on the top of a pole, and is above the ground by two arm's lengths.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the sick person, who embraces firmly the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.  
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is outward, if the patient lies down as we have said for one with gout, and tighten the bandage on the affected leg properly, and on the foot also. 
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two pieces of burning wood, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one piece of burning wood between the patient's thighs in the shape. 
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And put cloths soaked in water around it so that they do not burn the patient, then extend each of his limbs towards him and have him place his hand on the dislocation.  
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a table, and press as we said in the guild.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly and according as I have said. 
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And put his hand on the pain of being on the affected angle and then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the knee.  
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is not fitting to stretch the patient out, nor raise him up, but he should be as when his hip was dislocated in the shoulder, as we have said about childbirth on both hips. 
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And he should be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; 
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be in place when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; 
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then unbind it, and apply plaster on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days; 
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then untie it, and make it move smoothly, until the limb is comfortable. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated according to three manners: 
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards; 
et ne desalue point devant.	and it does not dislocate forwards. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at his thigh, know that it is dislocated; 
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all such is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; 
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee joint; 
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at his thigh easily; 
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on it, and let the leg air dry at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then unbind it. 
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the patient should not be troubled to go until the limb is comfortable. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not set, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes strained, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	The signs are that the ankle is swollen and tense before the part where it is dislocated:  
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the reduction is slight, and one must extend the finger slightly towards their hand when it is only loosened. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, it is fitting that you make the patient sit upright and hold them firmly by the leg above the ankle. 
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot beautifully upward. 
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; 
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is good; 
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, start the work again, for it will return; 
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a firm stick into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around so that he does not bruise the patient;  
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or a strap which he ties around the ankle; 
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then have each assistant extend equally, and let the stick be now between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when he is being extended;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the assistant's hands equally on the dislocation, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, put the plaster and bandages on top, and bind them firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the bandages are not too tight. 
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, bind them again. 
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days. 
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they are nicely extended without effort, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight, and put your foot on what appears of those joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns. 
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is equal and there appears nothing, then place under the sole of the foot a table with two legs, then bind it tightly and leave it for three days, then unbind it. 
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it rest until it is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:  
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, do not dare; 
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning use soothing things to draw out the abscess heat, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; 
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then reset the limb in its place, so that the abscess pus may come out. 
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the hot abscess, and heal the wound as it should be, with drying ointments; 
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if the dislocation is with a fracture, and small bones are broken off, let the surgeon do what we have said in simple diseases; 
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering the way of fear, as I have said, for this is worth more according to your creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. 
