O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, my dearest sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations. 
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery". 
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, the science is lost and corrupted, and nothing remains of the skill except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have moved. 
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is distanced. 
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery irons, and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. 
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to study the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their shapes and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and their number, and the movement and rest of veins, and the place of their origin. 
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that hands with hands are much, and with work are few; and in the same way in the art of surgery. 
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the things previously said, should beware lest he fall into error and harm people; so I have wanted many times more than those who interfere with this science and abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish barber who cut open the scrofula boil or a woman's neck, and cut the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued forth that the woman died in his hands. 
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see another example which treats a stone of a man of age, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut, he would die. 
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another surgeon who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the surgeon full of ignorance pulled out the fracture on top of the wound as if it were splinters by strong force, and did not leave the wound any dressing, and left it like that; and he commanded him not to undo it; and he stayed like that until his leg was all swollen and his foot and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to undo his leg; and when I did loosen it, it was so easy and he felt no pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But any way the corruption was already confirmed or in a limb, and could not be healed; and it did not cease to go through the limb until the limb was entirely lost. 
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another example of a boil which burst open and then inflamed due to its lord's wickedness. 
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting to touch it with iron unless it is in its entirety where one can remove all that is corrupted. 
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that manual work is divided into two divisions: namely, work where there is danger in several positions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger. 
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason it is necessary that you guard yourselves so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your arms in courage, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave curable illnesses hopeful of health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may be able to come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonishments: "Do not undertake a bad illness unless you are called foolish." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of the fastenings of the cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping glasses and wounds, and of extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments. 
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion. 
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest and most subtle science, with secret answers; and many wise men have spoken of this, and agreed on it; but their words are few to me, for I fear length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally for all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry complexions together matter, some said and said that cauterization is of great help; and the others said the contrary: that cauterization is not worth for an ailment that comes from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat a hot illness with heat, nor by dryness; and those who say the opposite claim that cauterization greatly helps hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold. 
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word. 
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times by experience. 
