O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment and I have made the end through its expositions and by its declarations. 
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery". 
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to everything, so the science is lost and scattered, and nothing remains of its strength except the small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved. 
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and science is estranged.  
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I should revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery irons and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. 
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for anyone who undertakes this to rise in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations of the parts, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their movement and of moving and resting veins, and of the place of their origin. 
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that knowledge with no action is much, and with action it is little; and the same in the art of the hand. 
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the things said before, beware lest he fall into error and harm people; just as I have seen many times over those who undertake this science and abandon themselves to ignorance and without experience.  
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who opened an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut into the arteries of her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands. 
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man of age, and the stone was large; so he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut into he would die. 
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took in hand the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had a wound; and the ignorant surgeon pulled out the break on the wound as if it were stuck by strong glue, and did not leave any salve on the wound, and left it like that until the end; and he commanded him not to unwrap it; and he remained like that until his leg was all swollen and his foot came to ruin.  
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come untie the leg; and when I loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was entirely lost. 
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another man who had a foul abscess burst open, and then it inflamed through the malice of his lord. 
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless it is in part where one can remove all that is corrupted.  
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in several ways; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger. 
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For which it is necessary that you guard yourself so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your arms in good conscience and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave curable illnesses to their natural course; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen said in some of his admonishments: “Do not undertake a serious illness unless you are called a fool by the common people.” 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.  
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries of water, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and on the shapes of instruments, and the fastenings for a cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.  
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are of cutting and piercing, and of cupping glasses and wounds, and of extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.  
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm of each complexion. 
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and subtlest science and secret responses; and many sages spoke of these things and agreed on them; and I am content with little of their words, for I fear the length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions; this is to know, hot complexion without matter and dry complexion without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, some said and said that the cautery is great help; and others said the opposite: that the cautery is not worth for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured of hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and those who say the opposite say that cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come in men's bodies. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.  
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word. 
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times through experience. 
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any way, no one should interfere except those who have experienced it and know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and outcomes and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, even cold and moist diseases.  
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors assembled and agreed on the cautery. 
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, son, that a cautery with fire is of more secret use for the cures and of greater benefit than a cautery with burning medicaments. 
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not come fiercely except to the member that is cooked and does not harm another member other than its name. 
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicaments come from one member to another in spreading and bring about illness to the member grieving healing; and by chance they kill the sick man. Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art and standing on the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of speech, for it does not please me that I withhold from you the secret which resides in fire and the quality of the work, how it drives away illnesses from bodies as the philosopher says in demonstrating, now receive it into your thoughts.  
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be done, and they drew up requests. 
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the ensuing harms are put below by the help of the cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm comes to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish people do; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cauteries are only a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its speed of action, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery. 
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the illness and its nature; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if this is not cauterized administered where he has a lot of superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return at all; but this happens rarely. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resorts of medicine, and that is to see; but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then understand well that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people. 
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are milder than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burns from a cautery do not cause putrefaction, but that is not true because I have tried it, and found that it is true in some men; and cauteries of gold are milder than iron, as they said. 
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if you heat it too much, it will melt in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles. 
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our iron cauteries which we have found more suitable for our work. 
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have now ordered this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	with olive oil cautery 
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two that are made because of a sickness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and likewise all sicknesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses. 
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head for III nights or IV, according to what the strength and the age and the custom of the patient can endure; and then make the back of the patient's head hot. 
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and have him put his hands on your thighs; afterward put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs come, if it bleeds a little then heat the cautery which is called "olive," of which this is the form: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the spot marked with ink, and go down and squeeze your hand little by little turning it; then lift your hand gently, and look at the spot to see if you see a small bone; and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; then take a piece of linen, and put soft cotton inside, and put it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then put linen soaked in butter on top; and leave it until the burn is gone; then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed. 
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and therefore, aid movement. 
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone and it should be healed. 
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that one must leave the cautery on thus, and press so hard that one lowers it from the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their spindles so that the humors issue freely out; and one must leave the wound open a long time; afterwards one must clean and heal it. 
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way for fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it out; because the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and also when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more safe and mild for me, and from this one I work therefore together salvation. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head 
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain affects the entire head and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie," and purging of the head with oils and plasters; and if the cautery we have previously mentioned is applied, it will be of no avail. 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Beware if the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold; then cauterize below the cautery a spot as we have said above. 
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the cautery to each horn of the head until the bone, as we have previously said, apply the cautery where it is called "vessels," and these are the places where cups are applied.  Soften your hand so that you do not see the bone; the patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later. It is necessary for the cauteries on the horns to be more subtle than those with which we cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form: 
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head 
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When a sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends up to the eye, and the head is purged by purifying medicines, and the other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, and all this does no good: then make cauteries according to two manners, namely with fire and with medicine. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicinal alum are such that you take a piece of alum, remove the bark and cut it into two pieces as large as the head, and then place the temple where the pain resides in half a manner so that you can put the piece of alum under the skin; and when it is placed, bind it well and leave it like that for twelve hours; and then untie it and rub with garlic, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; then put cotton soaked in butter on top as long as it can stay. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that I have written any burning medicines, or doze to treat burning medicines. 
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery which has this form: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has a little curve, and in the middle there is a small opening; and you put it on the painful spot, hold your hand steady, and turn the iron a little lightly until half of the thickness of the flesh is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn which is underneath, and blood flows abundantly. 
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterward put cotton soaked in oil and place it on the spot for three days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellary", at its very point, be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not old. 
de emigraine	from migraine 
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice for it, then it is necessary that you cauterize with a cautery called “cultellare” until it is white; and draw thus on the painful spot a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut an artery and that you do not come close to the bone; and beware of the mandible which moves when one chews, and let the nerves have no regard for the movement and let spasms not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting has great fear and the same for him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at what point it occurs in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries are not enough for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of his head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold 
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has used dissolving medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called “point”, of which this is the form: 
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the pained ear, or around both where the pain is held, and remove a piece from its root after you have signed the place of insertion; and make 10 points around each ear; afterward treat the place until it is healed.  
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth 
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cautery is none other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses; and do not make a cautery for those that come from dryness and spasm of nerves. 
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this type of torment that moves from phlegm with hydrars and purges of the head and gargling, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a fire's poke behind the temple, and the third in the juncture of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery spot on the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on so that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:  
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the knife we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little larger; after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed. 
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one below the head, and one on the place which is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before. 
de litargie	of lethargy 
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large herbs and purifying pills for the brain; then raise the head of the patient completely, and put mustard plaster on the back of his head which is written in the treatise of plasters; and this is the way of cautery: if you do as I have said. 
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed thus, it is good; and if it is not, make three cauteries from the temple down to the neck, with two fingerbreadths of space between each cautery; and treat as the others; and if you see swelling, and the patient suffers, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healed; and let the cauteries be called "olivare", as I have said before. 
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head 
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have said before; after this raise the head of the patient, then make a cautery from the temple to the back of the head, and on each horn, and one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the hottest part burns, then lift your hand; after this treat until it is healed, and let the cauteries be called "olivare" as we have said before. 
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy 
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those suffering from epilepsy should only use a cautery if they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers from lack of medicine.  
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, have them gargle and chew remedies that modify the brain often with good meats; afterward, they should apply oil to their head in moderation, and apply the cautery according to what we have said before, and apply the cautery to the vessel and to each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, apply cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, make them a subtle cautery according to this manner: 
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or moistures corrupted and phlegm is thick, then use the cautery of several cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis. 
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink things by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.  
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raise the head of the patient; afterward make a well-made linen twist, also like a circle, and put it under his head; and have the patient lie crossed, and be well held on all sides; afterward present the linen cloth, and anoint it with old butterbur ointment; and heat it over temperate fire so that he who touches it can bear it; afterward empty the circle from within beneath his head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with another good regimen until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that the cautery burns too much when making several points with it. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery removes the brain humorously; and then put moistened cotton buttered and greased with lard. 
de l’awe des eulz	from the eye of the ulcer
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye first comes to the ulcer by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach. 
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards, order him to bend his head back, and cauter him in the middle of the head, and give him two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is to both ulcers together, or one if the descent is to one; and apply all the cautery to all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with a part as you have. 
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how you will stretch it; and never make a cautery or haste below the two bones behind. 
dou cors des larmes	where the body cries
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are upon the veins, or beside the arteries that are in appearance above the head; and one sees that it is superfluities cold and phlegmatic, then make the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes: I cauterize on the head, and II cauteries above the two temples, and II cauteries or haste below the two bones; and if there is need more, so he cauterizes profusely above the eyebrow with a small cautery. 
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body cries within the eyes 
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give the patient three nights of decoctions; after the king's head, and make a cautery or half a cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries with the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the two shoulders, one peck below the hairs; and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it. 
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis": 
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive". 
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the shape:  
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauteries on the two shoulders as long as the shoulders are; and do not remove your hand until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	For a hair that pricks the eye 
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to parredons, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine. 
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your chair; afterward draw on a piece of paper a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then he puts moistened cotton in egg white and dill seed infusion on the eye, then heats the cautery which has this shape: 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the face at the spots you have marked, bit by bit many times, so that the flesh is burned at the spot; and the signs of the healthiness of the work are that you see the paper retract and the hairs rise to the point of the needle; then lift your hand and leave it thus for III days, then apply cotton moistened with butter until the burn is gone; after that treat it with ointment until it is healed.  
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on the same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are gone out, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and does not prick the hairs at the eye. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, of each one drachm, and grind together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it hastily on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place on the paper some eyes; and if the illness holds in only one eye, then you should work on only one, and if on both also; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and the head of the patient should be in your lap and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press one spot and another every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for he will feel a bite as of fire. 
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this long enough, then remove the medicine from your hand. 
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the place of awe, and observe if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put more of the medicine on the place where it did not work, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set; then put cotton moistened in butter on it until the burning is gone, afterwards treat the place of the anointing which is called "diafenis" and others, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not fall into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, start the medicine again on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; afterwards treat it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle fuel: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size, and according to this your constraints should be made; and let not the straight path be denied to him whose study is this art. 
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cautery 
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not profit at all, then it is fitting that you apply cautery to it in this manner. 
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and have his servants hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn its head; afterwards, put softened cotton wool soaked in egg white or parsley juice on the eye; then heat the cautery which is shaped like: and is sharpened at the point like the shape of a quill pen, together with the cautery. If you see that it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you see that it is also like a tent; but in any case, this which is sharpened is better for your work.  
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the rot, and drying it; and if it is closed, perform the operation, and treat beyond the bowels; afterward place a hot cautery on it, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part where fat accumulates above the eye so that your hands do not shake; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it. 
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, restart the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for 3 days; afterward, put soft cotton soaked in butter on it, and cure it with a desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered; and the king will follow as it would come in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand a fistula, and make the place; afterward put in the fissure a small piece of camel hair which has this form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And make it the size of a grain of plum; and hold your hand or the hair firmly, and do not let the patient move at all so that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary to put moistened cotton on the patient's eye in oil of rue or of wine: the lead will heal the place of the fistula, and the wound heals by marvelous health.  
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer pressure to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body through the nose according to what is proper in its own place. 
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips 
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks happen in lips which are called "furrows," and the same in children's lips. 
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small surgical cautery blade like this: 
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in those cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterward treat the area with cerate until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and stunk and become old and turned into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after you open or pierce the fistula opening, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches the bottom, and wherever the last place is; and do this once or twice, afterward treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured like this, that is good; and if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	tooth movement 
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it is not successful, then place the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards, heat the cautery as its form will come later in part so that you put a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery quickly inside, and hold as long as your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and begin the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold for an hour and then wash it out. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up. 
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth 
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical remedies are ineffective, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery. 
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is done as follows: take butter from a cow and put the end in a spoon made of iron or steel; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip like a tent, and soak it in boiled butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth and hold it until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton soaked in cold butter are placed on the aching tooth, and then put the hot iron on top until the fire reaches the end of the tooth. 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Fire cautery is done as follows: take a rod of iron or steel, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, so that its form will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools down; do this often because the pain will be gone that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in haste for this cautery, and then he refreshes himself strongly; and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of any kind that you wish, and according to what you have power over; and this is the form of the cane: 
des scrophules	of scrofula  
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as follows and this is the form, and it has two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery upon the abscess once or twice, as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put softened cotton moistened with butter on it until the burn is gone; afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.  
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines; after you cauterize at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat itself, but burn only a spot. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavile" as we have shown the form before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed. 
de la toust	Of the cough 
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the lungs are from cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor is dry, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the shoulder blade in its hollows; and another cautery under the breast between the two nipples; and let these cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that has been said before.  
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with the whole cautery which is called “points” and whose shape is described earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or even more. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the place according to what is said before, let the cauteries be at III reins according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, for that you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder 
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first loosen the dislocation. 
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After you lay the patient on his back and on his side; after lift the heart which is inside the armpit with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inwards, then heat the cautery that has two points so that its form is like this: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart as far as it pierces to the ribs, and the figure of the cautery would come together with four cauteries; and for this reason, a cautery is made with the one that has three points, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries; and the points are according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the cautery that has three points:  
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is added on this one point for which there are eight cauteries. 
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put the cautery on crushed herbs with thread; after let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted. 
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which thing rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder blade, or many cauteries by pricking. 
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until they draw it from its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and customary cures are used and they do not profit, then the patient must be turned on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this he makes three cauteries under the spoon of the breast by the quantity of a pennyweight, at each cautery clavile, and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and have half space between one and another so they are not joined together when they bring putrefaction; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they color the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:  
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that one needs to be cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking upon the stomach in one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize it all with the cautery which is called "poin". 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, until it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured by what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be soothed on his heartburn; and sign with three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity upon the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs of the chest come; and have a space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries; and let only half of the heart be burned, and let the patient be standing upon his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your intention is to cauterize these cauteries with a knife blade, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and let it not come as far as the boil, for the heart is very delicate at that place, and look carefully to see. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh or the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, they feel very severe pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure requires the mire, it is fitting that the patient be placed on their head; and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which here is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I the cautery until the flesh is burned, and it comes to a boil, until the pustule is entirely gone; after the cure according to the cure of wounds until it is healed; and it befits no one but those who have long studied in the art of medicine to use this cautery.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly work, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it. 
dou cautere de pleuresin	Of cautery with pleurisy  
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make cauteries with the roots of aristoloche, and in this manner: take a root of aristoloche long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your arm; and soften it in oil, and put it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauteries a bit lower down on the part below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a bit; and one cautery near the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides near the breast behind the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but make it open as if smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it, and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and then the pain ceases, as we have said in the liver abscess. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed. 
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in these divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then apply three methods of cautery which are all good. 
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which the first method is that you make three or four cauteries, lining them up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery at once, and have the patient often turn onto his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the core which is located at the mouse, where the side of the patient comes toward the left, and be the elevation according to which you lift the core according to the core, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After he puts the two inflamed nerves in place so that the heart is pierced on the other side, then he draws out fire with the cautery, and thus he will have four. And if you see, cauterize all the way to three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure, when it has festered for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures mentioned above. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it is fitting that you make four cauterizations around the belly button, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place near the breast; and let the cauterizations be very close to the hopes of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to prevent decay, and do not let the wound of the patient close after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be a chisel as we have shown before; and that for the back should be oval, according to what has been previously set forth. 
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet  
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrops, and are full of clear yellow water, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.  
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep, so that the clear water will be strongly driven out, and let the cautery be according to this shape: 
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make two cauteries on each leg at the point of a knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries exposed for a long time without cleaning, so that the pus comes out; after you clean the other wounds that we have said. 
de la menoison	From the mansion 
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When indigestion comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and very green, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery, or the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the belly button, all connected to a subtle key cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then cauterize his shoulder, and cauterize each vein, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good assistance. 
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids 
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or several, and they are old and composed of large, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those which are all behind below the almecdate, dot by dot in a triangular fashion, and one cautery below the buttock two; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then make one large cautery on the stomach as has been previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the thigh with a cautery of a nail; and leave the cauteries open for a long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the area until it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul" 
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then put it all ablaze upon the thelul that is cut; and leave it so long as your hand and the cautery reach the beginning of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward treat it with profitable ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery upon the flesh, it will be of greater help. 
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly treated wound 
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, a serious illness comes that can only be healed by cautery. 
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula occurs and is aged and contains putrid and corrupting moisture, you must first test the entire depth with a subtle probe, and be careful that you know the entire depth of how many perforations it has. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After you heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe has entered, and repeat the cautery until those rotten and corrupt bodies are burned once, or twice, or thrice according to the quantity needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves which are there, and the large veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, be careful of these parts, and do not make a through-and-through fistula except in fleshy places, and think that it is not pierced; after you treat the place until it is healed, and if the place is salted and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is rotten and corrupting the bone at its base; and as we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the illness of the kidneys 
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great windiness, and does not take pleasure from a woman, then it is fitting that you make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with a pointed cautery as we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help. 
de la vessie	of the bladder 
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow under the arm, both right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the finger of a fist; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be pointed according to the form previously mentioned. 
de la marris	from the marsh 
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make III cauteries around the boude, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and II cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said. 
de la hainche	of the hip 
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend to the hip joint and because of this it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and two bones are found in the leg, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the hip joint as it turns, so that the hip joint is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as those with which we have cauterized the stomach. 
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, make three large olive cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts; and cauterize until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip bone, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is not effective, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills. 
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which some are such: that you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large ones, and have between each cautery a space the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery should be applied to a hip dislocation using a circle as we have previously mentioned; but do it in such a way that the circles enclose the whole hip and all the muscles of the core are burned. 
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a prick; and let the cauteries be sharp, and burn the thickness of the core; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the toes or near them, then cauterize him where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery called "points". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, do it more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, apply a cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave it long enough to burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more pain and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who have applied a cautery on the ankle of the foot and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and the whole foot was pierced and corrupted. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the bowels which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply a cautery to one and the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say in regard to the cautery of the hip, in what manner it is done, make such an iron and let its head be as thick as a lentil seed or a little less, and let there be spaces between, from one space to another the distance of a fingernail; and let these spaces be opposite each other on two sides, and let them also be like knots, and let it have a well-made iron handle; and this is its form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the box of the sick hip, and turn it on the sound side; and the cauterizer once the cautery has retreated leaves it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open a long time; afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone using it; nevertheless, it is a good cautery for whoever can endure it and where it is applied. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you make the instrument with three openings in which descends the edge of the door and it is made of iron or copper with a long handle and in height it has two knuckles and between each one it has the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and they are open outside and above and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then put on the box of the hip bone to the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand very hard on the box of the hip bone; then place between the two circles the hot awl which has been heated in the fire a little, and leave it for an hour or ten, and let the patient endure the heat and burning.  
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is also a bite as of fire; and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip with soft water, and leave it thus for III days, and put butter on top until what is black from the burn is removed; and leave it III days that corruption may draw out; and this would be the last help after the cure of ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, you make an instrument that has water according to what you have done in the hip equally; and this is the manner of hot water, and I have written it or treated it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot coals, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening so that the point of a razor can enter; and put one pot upon another well sealed, and put alkali and hot ashes and soft water on top, as long as there are two on the powders then you will have it well prepared in your hand; and leave it thus until it drips with clear water and fat or well-sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it upon hot ashes and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very watery and is administered in the manner of works of medicine and in cauters of other members For it performs a notable work like fire, and if with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hip thus as tesisie and honey anacardi and hot ashes with soap, all these things mixed together.  
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us a cure by which a man was cured of the pain of the hip and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, and said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here afterwards. 
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in this manner that you take some fresh and dry green litharge, and grind it very well with a bit of fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain lies, and bind it; and leave it for III hours and by the amount that the patient no longer feels the burning. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make it enter or bathe as long as the body is a little warmed up, and make it enter or bed, and the pain will go away altogether and be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines with a cautery, unless it is after the evacuation of the body. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hairs, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in this manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and soak it in old oil, and put it on the fossa which is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called the navicular bone. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After you take dried goat's horn and char it with fire until it is charcoal, place it on wool and let it sit until it is extinguished; and do this again, and do not stop doing so until you think by feeling that the heat has reached the hip, and the pain is gone; and this method of cautery is called "goat horn cautery." 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back 
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive evacuation, or from similar cold expanded matter, none of these instances are worth cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter. 
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that after the patient has been purged of foul pills or other similar things, that one make upon their back where the pain lies three lines marked with an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and the quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you see fit, make three cauteries or four at the medium-sized cleaver cautery according to this form:  
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight throat when they rise, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines. 
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with a red-hot iron according to this form. 
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery brands each part of the spine equally.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterward, treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer a cautery in flaccidity which is in spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints 
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is from humors that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-based according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you take hold of the sole of the foot, make a cautery at every point we call "point". 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and to other joints, which happens often, make a cautery on each knee three or four from each side, all olive-based; and if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand strong except until the thickness of the skin is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two points around the wrist; and if there is still some pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the back of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the bone  
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture occurs in the limbs, and the bowels descend to the groin and it is new, it is fitting that when you see it healed, he should not eat anything that day; and let him use things that loosen the belly so that his humors descend from his belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath as long as the bowels are repaired, and reset them at your will, and sign beneath the fracture on the bone of the arm, and a sign resembling half a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery, which has this form:  
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it drips clear fluid 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and have the assistant hold his hand so they do not go back; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and a sergent under the thighs, and another under the buttock which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your strength, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it the first time, begin again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful subtly that the eyeball does not protrude when you make the cautery so that you do not burn it; and so the patient does not die or other harm. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.  
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is fitting that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and those for adults be large according to theirs; after three days, treat the area cauterized with butter until the burn is removed; afterwards treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed; and it is fitting that his bandages be loosened for a long time so that the eye does not protrude when he gets up to go into the chamber.  
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, give him a well-made bandage and have him wear it for forty more days; let him have good rest, work little, and avoid excessive drinking and eating, and raising his voice too loudly; and when he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here afterwards the treatment of cutting in this chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly 
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the cautery according to its quantity, and burn one third of the core; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of the incision and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another behind, and hold your hand steady with all the cautery heated. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and softer. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of ancient pain in no limb 
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being wounded, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and turns and its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of it. For such custom is that it should move to the limb that is closest, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed. 
de meselerie	of marrow
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The marrow is aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and the same sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it necessary to cauterize, take care if the sickness is at the beginning and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will infect the whole patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one on the nape of the neck, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the back of the head; and leave your hand there until the cauteries reach the bone, and so that the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize according to what is before. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the weakness is spread everywhere; and it clearly diminishes, it is necessary that you cauterize it with those cauteries which we have said or the chief one, and one cautery on top of the nape of the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttock and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the pits of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the last bone of the heel, so as not to burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the shoulder blade, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cauteries, the more you help, and increase the benefit; and know that patients do not feel any pain from the cautery as healthy people feel it, because the body is already entirely corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After cure the place with flour of beans with honey and other remedies until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cautery on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let the cautery be a small point entering the thickness of the flesh; then cure it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is made on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nevertheless let no one interfere with this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body. 
de albaras	from alum
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease which is called "albaras" is old, and the remedies of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a spot perfectly, according to the quantity of the species in the heart, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color changed; then cure it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and dove's blood and almond milk, of each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and let it air at the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancres by cautery 
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears, and you see it stop, cauterize it with a cautery which resembles a circle, all around the chancre. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless, the sages say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; and nevertheless, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times; and a better thing is that it be cauterized all around, with a cautery which is called "circular," as we have said in the discussion of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot move 
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it is slow to heal due to the excess it causes, or due to the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and has little blood, or due to time; and you wish to hasten its healing: then the cauterizer makes many small burns around it by pricking; afterward leave it as is. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to heal. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, so heat the cautery in this way:  
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and be such that the patient feels it behind in such a way that the course of the decay is alleviated. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron 
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of illness there is which is called "corroding," and it is nothing other than a wasting away of the limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can suffer cautery with fire, then heat the cauterizing irons very small and large, according to what suits the place where the illness is; after cauterizing on all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the burned places softened breadcrumb with oil as long as the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.  
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds causing flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, restart the cautery on that which remains corrupt. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment has sometimes been cured with a burning liquid instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the treatment of the burning liquid in the division: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come to the feet 
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that at the feet from a defect arises an illness which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing missing that bleeds the foot.  
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this illness are according to two manners. 
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot iron cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery like a quill pen, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it should have subtle edges; after heating it thoroughly on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it like this for III days until it begins to rot; then make a plaster of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place of cautery by applying ointment until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then you must administer hot iron cautery; and it is done in this way: take a cane of iron or wood, or a quill pen, and put it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say, warts; and place the cane so that it encircles everything, then apply a piece of hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and can find the path of the hot iron deep to the root; and let the patient endure the bite of the hot iron for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will uproot itself from all its roots.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do one after another, until you have removed all those that are on the body, then treat the inflammations which produce flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for trembling  
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or from a quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or IV on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery at the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery; this will leave the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold illness. 
des pustules puans	Of foul-smelling pustules 
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear through the body, baths or foul-smelling pustules, that come from thick corrupted matter. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so its point be grasped in fire, or of long aristoloche root, or with a lentil cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but are broken up from the superfluity whence they come, and are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut  
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great flows of blood from the cut artery at the wound which comes to the pardefuers, or incising an abscess, or with the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to staunch. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard so that the blood is quieted beneath your finger, and no drop issues forth; then apply fire to the olive-wood cauteries, several small and large ones until they are all red; then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is restrained.  
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the blood jumps when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another cautery that is in the fire. 
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well staunch it oneself, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a tight ligature of thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and strained tightly.  
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	He who would administer staunching by binding tightly with cloths or by putting burning things on it, or other similar things, will profit nothing thereby.  
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine at hand, they should place their right index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press well until it is numbed on the wound and on the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and numbed; and make inquiries beforehand about those who they need to cauterize and give medicines. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures by incision 
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases in which it is fitting to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have put this chapter from the top to the bottom, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that those who wish can find them more easily. 
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first one of the cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution. 
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. 
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment. 
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily because of the distress they find from their illness and the gravity of its nature; and one must be afraid of these. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And some of these give you their meaning and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the illness is pitiful. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you in this manner, but put greater trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not work rashly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and whose words you can take and hold; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting praise. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen. 
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by chapters, according to what it is before or the chapter on cauteries, which I have devised from beginning to end so that you may more easily find what you need.  
dou chief plein d’aigue	Sharp pain fills the head 
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too hard; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen hastened to death; and for this reason it seems best to me to leave these cures to others. 
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of pain, and the head grew thicker every day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture grew so much that it died, and this moisture gathered under the bone on the skull, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a wide slit in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture runs; and see this shape of the spatula:  
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form: 
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and a sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not answer you; then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner: 
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After, dress the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil on them, and leave it like that until the fifth day; then untie it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head be straightened evenly, and allow the patient to eat dry meat free of moisture as long as the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point, and make a cut according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let there be a flow of blood so that the patient does not die from the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	of rheumatism  
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a disease occurs in someone called "catarrh" in the eyes or the breast, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one burns the two arteries. 
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore it is necessary, when you have seen them together, that the patient bend his head back; afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck tight with the cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are filled up; then mark the veins with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula in two parts, so that the size of the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done with the breadth of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula below the artery and cut it above, cutting as much as you must through. 
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood should flow upward continually. 
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not appear to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark with ink and cut down to the bone; and what it is necessary for the blood to flow out is six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone a point without pus, so that the pus does not come up from the abscess, then bind the wound and dress it with ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	Of emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When chronic phlegm comes, and acute catarrh, because of moisture from tears and the heats in the temples and old ancient frenzy and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and all this does not profit him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told. 
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The way to extract them is such that the patient shaves the hair behind their temples and feels for the artery that appears in the temple, because it shows clearly by its beating, and is more full than in some men who are too cold; and if it is full, then the patient tightens its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and heats the area with hot water as much as the artery appears visibly; then take the scalpel of which this is the form: 
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then carefully scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up with tweezers and remove all the threads that are below it from each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the point of a hook, then cut the part according to the quantity of the two heads. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, all blood will flow out without stopping.  
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Let blood flow for six hours, down to three; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that rot does not set in before the wound heals, and so that there is a constant flow of blood; then cut away the excess between the two ligatures at that same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize the artery with a hot iron down to the bone until the heads are severed; this is the simplest operation if the patient does not have a fever and they are of warm complexion. 
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is a help to end moistures; therefore it is of greater help for moistures. 
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries it is fitting to fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top; and when you untie them, if they are cured by dry medicines which cause flesh to grow, and by bandages, until they are healed; and if without cutting of the artery as much as you work on it, hurry yourself to cauterize by a cautery, or employ the place with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stopped up; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until the blood is frozen, and apply cold water to the place until the blood stops, and it is extracted as it should be; and what is easier and lighter for the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with a trenching cautery divided into two parts, but let the trenchings be well spaced so as to keep their heat longer.  
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less. 
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a space of a thumb's width, and then when you have marked to cut the two edges, and you put the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two; and let them be distant between the two edges because it is not soldered by this cautery at all; and this is the shape of the cautery: 
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head of the sufferer, and no medicine cure that is done profits, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and his forehead throbbing as if with shivering; and the limbs are thin and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall out, and the papers are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is needed. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in ancient times "cure contuse," and what you do is to the patient who has this illness, make three cuts on his forehead; and let one of the cuts be as long as two thumbs all across the forehead going down until the nose, and the other two as two ribs above the temples, and beware of cutting the arteries that are beside the temples above the papery skin; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the length of three thumbs joined together; and have ready a piece of sponge and lots of cloths for wiping up the blood, then put in the spatula sharp on both sides as follows is its shape: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is beside the temple to the second incision; and scrape away all the flesh that is between the two cuts right down to the bone which lies under it; then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula. 
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put the instrument which is called "cultellaire" into the first fissure and it is very sharp on one side, and blunt on the other, this is its shape: 
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	Put the sharp side towards the flesh that is being cut, and the blunt side towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle of the fissure. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the flesh so that the incision is continuous until it reaches what appears in the heart, and then similarly do in the middle fissure until the other defurcation; and then draw out the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton into each fissure, and put soft cloths soaked in wine and oil and vinegar on top, and keep it so that no boils arise; and on the third day untie the bandage, and administer a large poultice of hot water, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures with which one cures wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	Where the eyes are pricked 
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When some catarrh comes accustomed, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weaken vision, and papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where one sweats in pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that these matters and this catarrh do not come only from many veins, and the mother cure that there is, if it is this. 
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must order the patient to put his forehead behind, then make a great cut between the forehead, and another two finger widths away. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be until the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when chewing; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton, and linen tents; then bind over softened cloths in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until the flesh begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, which cause flesh to grow. 
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it in these wounds to generate flesh throughout. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	For the stuffing of ears  
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that is lodged in the ears is one of four things: either grains, or a beast, or a stone from a mine or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing things such as water and easily flowing things and similar things.  
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is lodged in the ear a stone or another kind of thing that does not fit in the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear to the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill a few drops of violet oil or sesame oil, and then administer extraction; and make him sneeze by condition, and hold his nostrils closed when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and elevate the ear upward. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes to fruition through this treatment; and if it does not come to fruition, you will administer an extraction with subtle forceps, of which the form is: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes to fruition with the forceps, that is good; if not, you will administer an extraction with a subtle lancet of small size; and if it does not come to fruition through this, you will make a cane of reed and insert the head of the cane or the hole of the ear firmly, and plug what is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then treat it to come to fruition, for many times it comes to fruition as we have said; and if it does not come to fruition in any of these ways, you will take glue of which you take from birds, and put it on some instrument suitable for this, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and treat it to come to fruition.  
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not leap from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear in this way as for an abscess that is hot it comes and spasms; and the manner of the incision is such that you make the patient healthy from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or place depending; and let the incision be as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly at your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is within and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatula subtly according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine pincers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute pain then when a grain is in the ear it befits the patient to use sneezing as a first condition, and widely stuff the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And he should lie on that same ear where the pain is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out forcefully through this, it is good.  
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this does not work, take many small stones according to the length of your thumb, light and warm them a bit by fire; then have the patient put one or two stones in his ear, and strike upon it from the other side with another stone; and do not cease to do this from stone to stone until the pain ceases entirely, and thus it will jump out entirely. And if you see that, take a piece of wire and push one end into the ear, and grasp the other end with fire so that the longest piece of wire burns; then repeat again with other pieces of wire until the pain ceases entirely, as we have said about stone. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of a creature, if it is of small size, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel it, then use extraction with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is fitting that you look at the ear in the sun: if you see any worms, remove them with fine pincers, and if you do not see any, take a cane of which this is the form: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then gently pull out the whole cane; do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, then plug around the bone with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out strong as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is of silver or iron, three nozzles below the small holes, and above a cover for distilling; and to press the distillation inside the instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point abundantly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines into the bone, and let the bone be in the ear; then put the razor inside all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or finished from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be slightly warmed by the fire as they are distilled into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of the ears 
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have some opening in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults by stuffing a wound, or a splinter lodged inside the ear, and this stuffing sometimes comes entirely into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes the point appears through the opening, and one can see it well. 
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which then comes entirely in, if one cannot see it, is of grievous affliction in many conditions, and in this case it is fitting that you put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent stuffing, if the work has all these splinters, then this is its form. 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind entirely flat so that it does not hurt the ear; if the stuffing is a splinter or horn of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and pick it up lightly until all those splinters are removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is performed perfectly in the ear, then take a delicate razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. 
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the operation that the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce it lightly and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put a tent into the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with ground vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is fitting that you draw out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerate which is made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, plunge a sponge and cloths in cold water and put them on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding, which are found in treatises on distillations. 
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of paper 
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the remedy that comes to paper when they are moist and dry, it is fitting that you extend them with pliers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then put on the place powdered vitriol. 
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not come out, cauterize with a lentil-shaped cautery subtly, and cauterize again after the incision has healed; many times they recover, when nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return. 
de la gresle	of gravel 
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there come to paper certain things that seem rough in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone," and it is a gathering of large moisture on the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; do so with two large pincers, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it, then pierce a little of the paper; it does not matter to the patient; and if the fissure is large, stitch it together, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not exert force, for ointments will quickly restore it and engender flesh. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone descends into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over and extend the hailstone with pincers, and cut it and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the hailstone is cut, wash the wound with sharp salt water, and treat the place so that it engenders flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes 
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is engendered in cloths of paper on top and this happens more to children than adults, and it grieves much their eyes
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel it moving among them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient puts his head on your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and arrange a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity it contains of exirnach from each part, and then put it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other so that the exirnach is gathered within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatu mile a trenchant a slit about as wide, and not larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and make the skin perfect until you reach the exirnach; and in several positions the exirnach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat. 
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull it out then all at once with a piece of coarse cloth between your fingers in the direction outwards, and turn your hand to the right and left so that it is dispersed; and make sure you do not push into the slit, that you reach all the spatu mile up to the eye, that you do not hurt it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the arrowhead does not appear at the beginning of the incision, slightly widen the incision until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind securely. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt this remaining moisture. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a boil comes to the area, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper 
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hairs grow old and are added to those that are natural, they harm them and cause various diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albugine, as long as it is a cause for their destruction; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cautery, or by incision and suture, or by cutting according to what I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if you put a needle through all the thread on top; and let this be below the margin of the paper where the hairs grow below these hairs, and draw the thread over the top of all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs added, all along the spatula cutting, from the large tear duct to the small; then pull out the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then draw on the paper a figure of an anchor, as the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raised by the paper which is divided for all. 
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if anyone needs a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make at all the spatumile on the II lines that you have signed, and begin with the large tear to the small one; and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the lancet in one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all; then bring together the two lips at a stitch with a needle with all the fine wool thread, and wipe the blood, and air out the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows at any sticky things, if you see fit to do this; and if not, don't care, then leave the stitch and the threads for III days or IIII; then treat the wound without stitches with drying and astringent things, because the paper will revive at the closing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is useless (as the ancients said), and this work is done without fear; and if there is another way: it is that you sign the paper with a shape which is like the leaf of myrtle. 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then make sure he who holds it is equal to the small powers according to the form here: 
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the power to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with thread, and put it in the shape; and put the other thread behind the large tear, and the second thread behind the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have marked, as we have said, then assemble the two edges of the wound by suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more skillful. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of canes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and put the end inside according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of a spatula is; and cut two ends into two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on that which rises from the oil of the paper, and strain the two canes from the two parts form; and leave it so for several days, and the leather that grows will be strained and healed and will carry, as long as it seeks by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if the cut has some strength, then cure as long as it is healed; and when the wound grows closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer pull the hair; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and you put a very fine silk thread through it; then assemble the pieces and tie each one subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the chase another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the two threads; then put the patient's head on your lap; and be below the sun so that the works are revealed, for it is a subtle and delicate work, then you put the needle all along the chase at the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pierce the paper hastily as you pull it over the natural hair; then you pull the hair up to the chase, and you put in the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out all along the chase in the paper with the natural hair. 
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the flesh is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the flesh underneath along the entire thread that you have ordered, until the flesh comes out freely through the holes above it and you see it with the vision of the eye; then you will treat the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh grows up over it; and if the hairs are small, you will accompany one long hair from a horse's tail, and let it grow with the one that you are letting go of, until it is elongated and then remove it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rotting of the eye 
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacratio" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by incision of a wound, or by cutting or by cautery, and by similar things. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work is that you cleave that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put flax tents inside, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not right that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or elderflower water and flaxseed boiled together, and ointments of diascordium melted in any of the oils, and wrap a tent, and cure it with that. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal according to the form that it was before; and this work that we have said is no more than directions for this illness, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh that comes to the eye 
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is truly called "axacrati," is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental cause comes from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; and the way to perform the procedure is that you take a needle, in which it has a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh; then spread the flesh above the entire needle, and cut at one-sixth of an inch wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is fitting, that is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two fissures on either side within the paper; and let the sides of the two fissures be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has no "Greek I"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are below, from that which surrounds the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then apply the cure that we have said of softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.  
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a split or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a full split below the hairs of the skin, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two edges of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare all sorts of things so they can bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what suits him of work and instruments has many dispositions. 
dou soudement de la papiere	From beneath the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs in a man's hand in such a way that the skin above is sewn with the white of an egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor beneath the skin and lift it up; and hold it with pincers, as long as you cut what is joined by a subtle spatula, which is not too sharp nor too blunt so that the patient does not suffer that the spatula is too sharp or that the eye blurs; and let your incision, by which you separate that which is assembled, be light, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and heal all that which is joined, and do it sometimes with salt water in the eye, and lift with sweet water and colophony; then put between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and put wool soaked in plenty of egg white on top of the eye; and after the third day use colophony and soothing things as long as it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the angle of the eye 
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembling hard flesh; and another which is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and considered as pincers, cannot be grasped; and both resemblances begin towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is such that the patient puts his head in good health, then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper to your hand, then coils the nail like pincers of small doubleure, and extends it above; then takes a needle, and puts horsehair, or cowhair, or oxhair, and strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and inserts it into the nail, and pierces it through with the whole needle, and binds the nail with a thread and extends it above, and flays all the hair on the side of the nail which follows the prunele and silk to the hair up to the head, then cuts the remainder at the root of the tear duct with the whole spatumile subtly and with small force, and leaves the flesh natural or tear duct, so that by incision no body of tears usually comes; and sometimes only bind the nail to the oncine alone, and to the thread, as we have said; then flay one has all the spatumile according to which the form is.  
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the spatula does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the eye is not pierced; and after the incision pour into the eye a bit of silk thread, and with a collar made of silver, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed. 
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicines; and it grows back as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, operate on the eye of the patient, and take a small sharp spatula according to this form:  
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes a little and the rasping hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of silver and a red collar and silk thread, and cover the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed. 
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the tear duct harms the eye greatly, then suspend it to a string and cut off a portion, not entirely, so that tears cannot come through; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made from litharge. 
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the iris 
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In the eye of some men, flesh sometimes grows, covering the iris and clinging to the eyelids, turning red like a rose of balauste; the work is such that the patient puts his head in good health, then he cuts the flesh and removes all that flesh with appropriate forceps for this purpose, and holds it firm; then he cuts the first piece of flesh and continues cutting with a razor until the end, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation; let the incision be made on the spatula as we have said in the incision of the inguinal hernia and with the small forces with which one removes the sebaceous gland, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of wormwood bruised or distill into it red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines; then put hot cotton on the eye with an egg white so that it is assured against a hot abscess; and if anything remains and the pus overcomes you and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and do this as long as there is flesh attached in the eye by this likeness.  
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you alleviate the treatment of each one who is weak from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb can endure that work. 
des voines des eulz	of veins of the eyes 
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	They are red veins that are covered over the eye, and steal from sight its work and weaken the eye all days. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary then in the first place that you look at whether the eye is where it is strong, and there is no other disease except for the redness; then proceed in this way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins at all the incisions according to your knowledge, and let the incisions be subtle double according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be given in degrees within the body according to this form: 
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then one must carefully cut those veins subtly and wipe the blood hour after hour until you see those veins far from the eye; and be careful not to pierce the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun and be very ardent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, then distill green and red coliere into the eye to corrupt what remains hidden. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot gather all of that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of those veins, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then begin again according to the manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces: 
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye 
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	They are called "arissati" fistulas: when you treat it with a cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then incise upon the abscess where it should flow, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed. 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then shape all the instruments according to this form; it is called "aspre chief," and is made of hard iron at the head end, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form. 
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Place it upon the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that the corruption is removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines. 
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the fistula is sewn together and flesh grows and the body of the fistula is sewn together and remains so for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed and no bad things happen, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, there is nothing else to do but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, and let the head of the drill have 3 angles, and let the drill be thinned down to its point as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye one inch, then turn the drill entirely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels this because the vein in this will tell if they are holding their hand on their nose; and then restore the area with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the wound, the matter will go to the nose; which is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	From the removal of the eye 
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is neither clouding nor diminishing, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then apply a bandage, then put on cupping glasses or cauterize without injuring to suck, then place on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and frankincense and sarcocol, and then strain the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each into four, and then put one upon the other according to the quantity that the eye may need; then bind it above with a hard bandage, and begin again the cupping glasses to suck without injuring; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the strained eye day and night, and if the bandages become loosened, it is necessary that you strain them very much; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not, begin again the plaster and the cloths and the bandage and the cupping glasses until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Where a rupture of cloth has occurred
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture comes in the cloth weave, then it appears, and there are strips of paper like resin grains, and it is easy to see; then if you have seen it torn, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then thrust another needle where the doubled thread of the tear is located; and make it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to its position; then grasp the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the weave around it, and pull it tight, then remove the needle and put a softened wool cloth soaked in abundance of egg white on it; and leave it as long as the threads knit with the weave, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and often the wound is restrained by the weave on each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has a large appearance, pierce it with a delicate scalpel that comes perfectly straight from the point, and drain the whitish moisture and reduce the swelling, and then extract it when it is healed. 
de la bowe de l’oil	from the belly of the eye 
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a belly which is assembled in the eye, appearing like sharp descending, and it is not sharp; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on an appropriate and straight seat, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it as much as you see the belly coming up over your eyes; then let it be attached, and do not descend and let the light be obscured, and see the patient things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is sharp, and if the descending of the belly is not even as we have said.  
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and place it on the cornea cloth, prick through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea cloth, as long as the pus comes out; and when it has come out, distill into the hot sharp oil mixed with honey, or sharp oil or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the sharp oil 
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the resemblances of the sharps in the division, and what it is necessary for piercing; so work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, far from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of oil in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument beside the cornea by the thickness of a ray in that whiteness of the eye to the part of the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda way be at the perfection of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the cornea cloth, then put the instrument up to where the sharp point is, then express it below one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it is sharp now, let the patient see it in front of him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the point rises again the second time, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, carefully extract the almond by turning your hand bit by bit; then put it back in a sharp point of a gem seed, and lift the eye from within. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put the eye with wadding soaked in rose oil and a lot of egg yolk, and bind it with the healthy eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we and those of our time put on common broth with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form: 
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle place, then put in almond, as we have said;
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess comes, untie the eye bandage before the seventh day and apply a dressing for abscesses; and when it is appeased, remove the bandage and put a strip of linen on its face to cover it for a few days, and keep it in a darkened room thereafter. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then gradually leave the house little by little and return to normal activities; and know that no disciples should interfere in this matter. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	One man came to us who was from the Yrach, and he told us that in his country they made a kind of almond paste with which one sucked the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new invention. 
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almond paste so that those who do not know them can recognize them: and they should be made purely of grain. 
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of those of this same subtlety, and the last in III sharp angles. 
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh off the nose 
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or noses growths diverse, of which there are some that resemble scorpions with many feet; and if there are such growths with flesh tinged with a fox color, and if there is flesh soft of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that one therefore of those growths which is soft and not tinged, it behooves that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and pour oil on those growths, and draw them forth; then cut off what you can hold with a delicate sharp spatula on one side, as much as you know that growth is all removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that one cannot cut off, work it with all the delicate instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without swelling or abscess rises, cut as it behooves; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the flesh is scorched and all the growths are removed, then pour on the nose fresh and sharp wine. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the newborn child works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh on the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach to cut: then it behooves you to put a flax thread a little thick, and knotted by hand, with a space of one inch or less between each knot; and place the child's cheek upon the thread in its nostril, and pull in odorant until it comes through the nostril into the mouth; and often children are done thus at schools, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other as we are who are on the thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as much as you know that the new flesh has corrupted the other flesh, then treat the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and return it to its original place as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh; and then put on the nose a cane of lead for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, into which one distills oils and medicines onto the nose:  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and conduct it in the same way; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and have a handle at the top to hold it while heating the oil or any liquid. 
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh out of the nose 
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" is born from the head near the nose and grows and becomes large until it is seen as a thing to behold; and for this reason it behoves you to cut it at the beginning, and remove all the bone, then put on its place a cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it while it is large, take heed if it is hard, of red color, of poor sense: if not touch it with iron for it is an ulcerated abscess, for when it is cut, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of red color, and you see that it can be all cut out, then empty the patient and cut without fear and cure the place with drying and restraining things. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn 
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore when this happens to anyone, if he looks at whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then he joins the two lips together with a suture, then cures it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you flay all the parts of their core so that they bleed, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and extract them, and powder with powdered dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it drains by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is such that you bring together the wound: either with needles, as we have said in sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have taught you. 
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses 
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sometimes within the lips occur abscesses hard, resembling grains of millet, both smaller and larger; then it is fitting that you turn back the lips, and cleave upon each nodule, and take them with pincers and cut in two parts; then apply the lye after incision with powdered vitriol until the blood has been dried up; and then olive oil, and heal the wound with dry things until it is healed. 
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums 
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there arises upon the gums flesh overgrown, which the ancients called “albulus”; it is fitting that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out; then apply powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders upon the wound; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of the deaf 
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, crusts which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and citron-colored and worm-eaten, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your lap, and raise the teeth or the crusts that appear, as much as there is nothing left; and do the same with blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other blemishes, as long as they are cleansed; and if one removes what was at first cause, it is good; if not, one begins again the second day and the third, until you have raised everything; and know that teeth need different forms of instruments to raise, according to what the work shows, for the razor with which one raises broken teeth has other forms than those with which one raises between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with you. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay as much as you can in pulling it, for this one must not do; because it is a very high substance so that one has no excuse for pulling it. 
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you are certain of the aching tooth. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks it is in a sound tooth, and pulls out the good tooth; and nevertheless the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the bad one remains, for we have often wanted to do this with these healers; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you flay around the tooth at all its edges very strongly to preserve the gum from all sides; then pull it with your fingers or with subtle forceps at the first stroke and stroke, as long as it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the forceps; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.  
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these instruments and insert its tip into each side lightly, and move it as you did first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and decayed, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with pincers so that it does not break when extracting; and it is very wise to work around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and leave a part remaining, and return to the patient because of the malice of the root causing greater pain than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to do as ignorant barbers often do, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth, and do not apply what we have said; but they cause great illness by the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply ground vitriol to the place; and if this does not work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments with which one pulls out teeth first should have long points and thick handles so that they do not double when you pull out the tooth; these are their shapes: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick limbs so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should have teeth to hold the flesh. 
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after pulling, it is fitting that you put on the place cotton moistened with butter for one or two days. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the flesh is softened, then you put in the forceps which are called “algefri”, whose head resembles a bird's beak; and they are made inside like a file and this is their shape: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is fitting that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called “althali”, that is to say, a small spatula, of which this is the shape: 
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it must be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps because of this, it is good; if not, you must help yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come here after: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two jaws, of which here is the form: 
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other ironworks which are in front in the manner of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which here is the form: 
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument must be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments with teeth exist; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise master artificers invent by themselves their instrument according to what their works and the illness demonstrate to them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of others, so that it does not break the chariot or other bones, or it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, as I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, of which here is the form:  
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, if you have all these instruments: 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural course of the body, and the form is ugly, even in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth was born after the dentition, and is not in its proper place, and it cannot be treated or filed; then the rasp; and if it is connected with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown, and which resembles a small beak, and is made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the rasp bit by bit in small portions for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is visible so that it can be filed, then use a file with one edge as its shape is shown here. 
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and file the tooth little by little in gentle strokes, so that it does not move while it enters; then smooth the surface at the end with no rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then file down its sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth falls out 
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth falls out, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on what he chews without pain, and you have treated it with astringent medicines, and that does not work; then you must restrain it with a thread of gold, for a silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the crooked teeth, if there is one or several, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again until the part where you began, and pull your hand subtly and gently, so that it does not move; and let your ligation be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the head of the bone with forceps and assemble them and put them back between the healthy teeth so that it does not bite the tongue; then leave it so tight as long as it can stay and if it loosens or the threads break, remove it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for its entire time, this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two broken ones as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the head of the tooth is removed, we put it back in its place again and again as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes make a form of a cow's bone tooth and put it in the place where there is a deficiency, and remove it as we have said, and it will remain and serve for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the ligament of the tongue 
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament which comes below the tongue by nature, or one is born with it; or by accident of a sewn wound; and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament widely, as long as the tongue is loosened from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is from sewing of a wound, then put in the hook and cut the ligament widely; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is below; and when you have done this, lift the area with sharp rose water and alum, or sharp cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and bind the patient each night, so that the wound may not close. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if a flow of blood comes, put ground vitriol on the spot; and if it does not stop, cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for that; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of a dark color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it leans towards whiteness, and there is moisture, then cut the skin, and make an incision with a fine scalpel, and free it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding does not stop in your work, put ground vitriol on it until it is quenched, then return to your work until you have drawn out all the pus; then lift the place from dirt and salt, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat 
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godath", and we properly call them the two tonsils, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will cut it, or it will burst on its own; and if it is of a whitish color and the root is fine, have your instrument ready to cut, but look first to see if the abscess is hot, at rest and appeased.  
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his back to your left side, and open the mouth and grasp the tonsil with your hands, and press the tongue down below all of the instrument, so it is shaped; and it should be silver or fine steel as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue against all these instruments, and you see the abscess, take the lancet and put it into the almond, and hold it firmly on top as much as you can; and don't pull anything away from the cloths, then apply a bandage to the instrument, so that it has a shape which resembles strength; nevertheless, the heads are bent, and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of hard iron or steel. 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, take the forceps, which are shaped like this:  
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And they are sharp on one side, and blunt on the other; and when you have grasped one of the almonds, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water that is both hot and easy to swallow. And if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water in which pomegranate rinds have been cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood has stopped; then treat it until it is healed; and if at any time other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two almonds, cut them as you did the two almonds previously. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, to be known the abscess of small sense; and it had almost completely closed off the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained like that for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had forced two reins through the two holes where it was born. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then and put one lancet in one hole, then I drew it out forcefully and drew a large portion of pus; then I did the same thing through the other hole where it was born, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that I put the lancet into the abscess and removed some of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passage of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow back again, and filled up the place that I had emptied, so that it became very large; then I lanced it and cauterized it inside the throat; thus it stopped growing; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to her afterward. 
de l’uve	from the eye 
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When a cold descends to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below large and round, it is called "eye." 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the pus of the abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, it behoves you to cut it; and that which is round and gathered and is not long; and it is bloody or a yellowish color or black, it behoves you to make an incision. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient. 
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It behoves you, then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, from its whiteness and length, to make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it underneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned for the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is fitting that you do not cut away more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut away more, it grieves the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and heal it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid to be cut, it is fitting that you use something for the cauterization of his fearful senses. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your sound hand, and then presses his tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and configures it with a sharp, living point, so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and in employing the end of this instrument, of which here is the form:  
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And say that if a head is covered with hair where the medicine is to be applied, like the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the eye; and the patient shall lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend into the throat, and the blepharitis; then hold your hand all over the medicine and press it upon the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it become numb and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into all the cotton on the cane above it, until the cotton is heated upon the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and let the scab fall off after four days or five. And if you need to begin the cautery again from the medicine, then begin again, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and let him be washed with cold water, and let him be treated with gargles until he is healed.  
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and wormwood and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them into a pot, and add water and boil; and let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and halfway up the pot insert an instrument shaped as follows: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or iron, and one end should be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through a tube until the eye is mortified; then repeat often until the eye dries up, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; and do not do this except when a hot abscess is declining. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside the head a quail egg, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for a quail egg does not make the vapor heavy on the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether safe. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else gets stuck in the throat; so it is fitting that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, it is fitting that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will release the stuck thing through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of stale bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will come out, and then draw it out forcefully; and if it does not come out forcefully from what we have said, take an instrument of plumb according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised up high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all life leave him, nor push any bone inside; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows where the thing is airy; if he swallows down, or he draws it back forcefully with the whole instrument equally, until it is drawn out. 
de la sansue de la gorge	from the mucous of the throat 
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes medicine is the mucous, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not profit at all, then look into the throat of the patient toward the sun, then press his tongue against the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the mucous, draw it out entirely with a small hook, or with subtle forceps that are good for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a cane with a pointed end, and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the hot point of the iron on the cane and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a sharp pain every day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and make it swallow, moving it in their hand often; and as soon as they feel the pain, they will spit. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if they do not spit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I described in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without delay. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to fumigate is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and put the head of the instrument into the hole. Then you pour your fumigation, and have the patient put the end of the cane into their mouth, closing their mouth so that the smoke does not escape but reaches the throat; and the throat will now fall away, and if it does not spit, then start the fumigation again many times; let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water; then they will need to spit out by this means.  
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinus, if it can be seen, resembles curved tongs for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a sewing needle's beak, and it has roughness like a file so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; see here its form: 
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses 
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many abscesses are similar according to what memory comes here after one another in this book and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in two ways of which one is in its own likeness and from the moisture that it holds. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is according to the places where they are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that come at joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.  
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the belly is ripening according to its fulfillment; and if to such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as with abscesses which are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it as long as it is ripe around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; or where it is near the fundament, pierce it even when it is not ripe; and it is not fitting that you pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is near the fundament, so that it may ripen perfectly, and be elongated within, and there come a fistula; and it cannot heal in a long time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is fitting that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is fitting that you make the perforation where the pus most collects in the abscess, and where it appears to move; and let the perforation be long with the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all its equal parts where there is no weeping. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that weep, according to that member. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is worth noting that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. 
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it in front of them, the body will be elongated by its venom, and is full of a lot of filth; and perhaps the lips and depths harden. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what its limbs need. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you administer small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the core, and cover; when it has become yellow as drapelz, and is numb, then it is necessary to do as one does for buboes: and if there are some that are split into three angles, and some that you cut like a myrtle leaf, as abscesses of angers; and if there are some where you make a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.  
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, it is fitting that you pierce it thoroughly; and it is fitting that when the abscess is large, and it has collected great pus, and you pierce it, you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then stopper the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing further; do this many times in succession, until all the pus is gone; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes leaps with the discharge of pus, and by chance the patient dies, and you are not to blame. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound clean, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full incision, apply strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes, you should place a strip in each one so that they come together against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the flesh, and you have sewn it around, then fill it with old cotton or shavings of flax linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then unbind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water quickly and easily, moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding continues, apply a bandage and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book to the wound; and if it is during winter, and the wound or abscess is very nervous, you should put cloths soaked in wine and warm oil on it; and if it is summer, and the wound is fleshy, you should put cloths soaked in cold water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, for three days, as we have said; then untie the abscess, wipe it, and treat it as appropriate until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this should be universally known in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter. 
des soros	of serpents 
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the core of a boil comes small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in cloths, as the joiner of a hinge, and much there are of resemblances.  
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some of fat and such where there is moisture as well as pulsations; and if there are such that are hard and piercing at the waist, and there is no doubt whether the artery does contrary.  
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so it is that you try with all the instrument which is called "introducer", from which the form comes here after, what it contains.  
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, so let it pass over for a long time. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, so flay without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns then when you leave something; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and this will run what remains in the night. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then start the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain overnight; then heal the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds thick pus, do it according to this form, for a long time; and scrape your ointments, and flay it from all sides, and put all your treatment of drawing away the pus where it lies; and if the artery makes you contrary, do what I have told you afterwards. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for an abscess if it is pierced, and in the loins and in the groin as I have told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the lancing on a pierced abscess and moistened, is lighter, for they are points of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or head where it has no moisture, and of those were the abscesses that I cut or head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had done any, he would have made as good a wound as from a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses coming or chief, those which come as chief of children and as roots of ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that the pus can come out; and treat it as it is necessary. 
des scrophules	Of scrofula.  
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses happen at the neck, and below the armpits, and in the groin, and rarely they come elsewhere on the body, and they are many, and joined together with each other. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own bone, as the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofula are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones which do not want to obey health.  
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one then which you see of good disposition to be touched, and it seems the color of the body, and moves at every part and is not near to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the duct, and is not deep; it is fitting that you cut it above, and scrape it from every part, and extend the two lips of the wound with a needle, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let the instrument not be sharp nor cutting so that the hands do not slip, and do not go too far forward lest you cut what you should not.   
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stanch blood, and remove the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work until you complete it; then look with your index finger to see if any small scrofula remain, and cut them out and clean them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not right to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then bandage it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you know how to cut the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofula that have excess, pierce them where it appears dead; and pierce it as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then apply tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, apply ointment dressing promoting flesh until it is healed. 
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the fold of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be scraped; and this should not be done by anyone, for all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two tonsils. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the canal of the lung, it is necessary to scrape the epiglottis to avoid the loss which comes from strangulation.  
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three or four circles with a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incision in the soft palate, not in the cartilage; and those who are skilled in the sectioning of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough to be avoided. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to the whole width, then split the chest until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the diaphragm, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the sectioning of the phlegm of the windpipe which escapes through the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed when we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the chest, and sew it all alone without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth, until it is healed. 
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely opened, and the patient is judged to be dead, and his breath fails. 
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cleanse it, as long as it was cleansed; and I will tell you what I saw. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat and cut part of the channels of the pharynx; and I was called to cleanse her, and I found her as if dead.  
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come from it, and although she had not covered her vein nor conducted anything but the throat, and the veins were cut by the wound. 
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound and treated it until it was healed; and nothing further happened to the young woman except that her voice became hoarse, and then returned to normal afterward; therefore I say that one should not be afraid in cutting the epiglottis. 
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat 
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess colored like yellow wax, and is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; when natural there is no cause.  
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental cause occurs in two ways, one of which resembles a fatty growth, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from a blood vessel; there is danger involved, and it is not fitting to work with fire except on those that are small, and thoroughly probe and examine all the surrounding area: if you find it as soft as new fat and it does not adhere to any vein, cut it out as one cuts out a growth and treat it in its entirety, if there is any; and bind it well at first, and treat it as appropriate until it is perfectly healed.  
des nous	of us 
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are for us, of which I will say all the resemblances; and now it is fitting that I say all the difference that is between us and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever is heat and lasting fever, as long as the ebullitions have not passed, and putrefaction is accomplished; then the fever and heat subside.  
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With swelling there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a bruise, and becomes large; and they are according to two resemblances, either fatty or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.  
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is fitting, when you come to the treatment of swelling, that you try and inquire first with all the instruments called "introducer," according to what its form will be or chapter which comes after. 
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to inquire into abscesses of us is that you take or a moister place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then let it be according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intruder, and take care lest it jump out. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs quickly, whatever color it has, do as I have said of the other abscesses; and if after the intruder no moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so make a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape it from each side, and guard the place where it lies so that you draw it out cleanly with the new; and if you cannot draw it out cleanly, draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains nothing, the nose returns many times; and if there remains a bit of it, and it does not grieve you, apply the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, extract the wound, and put soothing things on hot abscesses, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the nose is large, cut the two edges of the wound, and cure it with those who bring flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or another hastens and apply the place of ground vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound rots, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cutting what remains in the nose. 
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of introducer instruments, and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles with which we sew up the sores, and are made of citrine iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and are more tried with black lead for enclosing the curves of a fistula; and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of lancets are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are lancets that have two curves in three ways; and there are lancets that have three curves, and are also of three ways; and there are lancets that have two curves, and lancets with only one curve, and are also of three ways; and all this is necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these, which are made for cutting, and there are some that do not cut any stronger than from one side, with which one strips the veins, so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve; and among these instruments are the lamels inserted in handles, so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses; and they are of three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one does not use any stronger than in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar parts; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a fistula knife, according to this shape, with which one drains blood. 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And put it back in place several times according to the alignment of the veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form: 
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so much so that they resemble women's breasts; and they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them must proceed according to this form from line b. to line g.: 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine made from charcoal, then bring the two edges of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down and is softened because of its size as it happens in women, then cut it into two ribs above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds onto the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line b. up to line g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and do what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever else is necessary in the treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the runoff of blood, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it removes the remainder and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits 
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture. 
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said when cutting scrofula, and if the wound runs pus, then apply a cautery as we have said before. 
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of an artery 
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is severed and the skin above it is stitched, many times abscesses form, and the same thing happens to an engorged vein with an abscess; and if you know when it is due to the artery, the abscess will be long and slender; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel something pulling away; and when it is from the vein, it appears round and smooth; and it is folly to open this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles or the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore it is necessary to avoid using cautery, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it; and in the case of swelling due to a severed artery, make a long incision through the skin above it; then operate as for ligatures, separating the artery from the surrounding tissues until it is exposed; then insert a needle beneath it and pass it through to the other side, drawing out the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries located in the temples; then prick the area between the two ligatures with a surgical instrument until all the pus that is there comes out, and the abscess will be released; then apply a bandage impregnated with oil, until the ligatures close; and treat it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to vein engorgement, you must hold in your hand whatever part of the abscess adheres to the skin, then insert a needle under the spot that you are holding, and pass it through, threading it with a double thread so that you can draw it out from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have told you, making a ligature on one or both ends of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads will come loose, insert another needle through all the threads under the entire abscess to the incision of the first needle, and draw out the threads in four places; then open the abscess until the excess pus comes out, then cut away the excess tissue and leave what is ligated; then place a softened cloth bandage soaked in wine and oil, and apply bandages and ointments as necessary until it is healed.  
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves 
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much labor, and similar things. 
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms and all their joints where they are, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several positions without pain; and when it is removed, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely part of the body, but below the heart; and moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one that is in the joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would contract; and the one that is on the head or forehead, makes the skin swell. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a lancet, and flay it, then the bone setter assembles the wound with stitches, and cares for it until it is healed.  
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging 
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the bellies and nowhere else a swelling, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and thick flesh; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had tiny roots, and they were easily cut, and constantly oozed moisture. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six ounces, and the operation is such that if you look, the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has subtle roots; if you cut with a scalpel wide and have the fire cautery in your presence. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist there often comes excessive blood flow, and if the vein does not stop bleeding, then you must use the cautery; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision with iron, then take a thread well-made from flax, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then loosen it, and do not cease to tighten the flax thread until it stops the artery, and bleeds through it without effort; and if the roots are large, then be afraid to cut them immediately because of the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not grow back; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of a dark color and poor in sense and full of milky appearance. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.  
quant li boude ist fuer	When the arm is strong 
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the arm comes by cautery of wound or fissure of sinew, and it is on the belly and in this some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood which cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness; and if it is by the rupture of the sinew and by the issue of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears with diverse issue.  
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two ends it responds, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for great effort. 
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and appears well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict at all; and if it is from blood, then it appears by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is from windiness, it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you order the patient to hold his belly, and be extended all straight, then sign around the whole abdomen with chalk; then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed at every span, then extend half of the abscess above at the end of a large needle; then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of very strong silk firmly, and let the knot be loose; then work on half the extended abscess above the tie, and put your index finger, and grasp the intestine; if you find it caught in the tie, untie it, and push the intestine out from the belly; and if you find the bowel, grasp it with the needle, and cut off the excess; and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, go well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape that you make pierce; then pull the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it dries up, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself; or cut it off when it becomes subtle and rotten, then cure what is necessary, and sew the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place with what is necessary, and suture the place. 
dou chancre	a sore 
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of a sore, and how one should work upon it with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron; and we say that a sore grows in the flesh, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when a sore is in a place where it can be shaved, such as a sore which is on the breasts, and on the thighs, and in similar places, then one should remove it all when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not right for you to approach it, for I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone ever healed any before me. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work; then cut your oncines or sore and the hair from all sides, and bone from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and wipe the place well with your hand or with something else, and if the running of blood prevents you from cutting into the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is eclites only; and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: to wit, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you give medicine to this resemblance of dropsy which is called “eclites” by medicine, and the cure does not profit, then consider whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things; if so, do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus: lay the patient straight upon your hands, and have the attendants press the belly at the end by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the spatumile espinous according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be sharp on two sides. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let it have a point, and in no way be so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor pierce them; then see if the dropsy is directed toward the intestines: if so, you must cleave beneath the navel three finger-widths to the right above the hipbone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision will be on the left of the navel three finger-widths; and if it is for the spleen, let it be on the right, and do not allow the patient to lie upon the incision lest the superfluities run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it in, and lift your hand along the entire spatula between the skin and the flesh as when flaying to the amount of a fingernail or so around; then pierce the flesh until the spatula comes to its eighth place, and this is the place of the acute angle, then draw it out, and push this instrument into which shape: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and is of iron or of light artichoke, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side, III holes; and II on the other, and I on the other; and the head is cut like a quill pen, and this is the form of the incision which scribes use to cut their quills: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head above is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now onto the instrument; empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than what is right in that hour, by chance the patient might die because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or his jaw might become numb, or he might approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's strength signify, and his pulse; then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held for the heart which pierces the hole that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then start the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the point a small quantity; do this every day, and be careful not to force as long as there remains but a point. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient, and leave a great deal of fluid there, then treat the area with dry earth or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing in the sun; let him drink it; and use drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the fluid, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the constriction of the penis 
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary soon, he should pierce all the way through with a very fine tool according to this form:  
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place a small tube of lead inside, bind it and leave it in place for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the tube so he can urinate and then replace it; and by chance if it is not necessary, because the urine which comes will not let it close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose pores are small, if they are treated with a clove of garlic, as we have said, will widen. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have their pores in place are blemished, for none are born who have the pores at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and they cannot engender because the matter cannot come up to the marrow, and it is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of working is that the patient lies often on his back, then stretches the head of the penis and cuts it as the size of a feather so that the pores are in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, have it stopped by someone who stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the penis 
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often these pustules come to the penis and are an ugly sore appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you grasp them with a fine lancet, and cut and cleanse them all, then put softened cotton on Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the pustule is malignant, of foul color and discharging, it is necessary that you administer a cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the pustule is at the top of the penis and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pustule which is inside first; and when it is removed, then you cure the one outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure them together, unless the flesh of the penis is well secured so that it is not pierced, blackness and corruption come to its penis and testicles; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then bind an ointment plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate rind and vinegar on top, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a discharge of blood comes, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is to say, in the discharge of blood and in corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you draw or conduct from the penis a cane of lead, and make the patient urinate among them; and when the hair burns at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then you must scorch it with the chosen instrument, so that the ligatures are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, it is necessary that you scorch it at the spathula any spot on the head of the penis and the skin; then separate well between them, and put a delicate linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not burn immediately. 
de la circoncision	Of circumcision 
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a matter of simple continuation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we undertake this task willingly, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest for safety. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience. 
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions use an entire knife, and with force, and at one go; the heart was cut out because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts above it, the one below remains. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and with cleaning which is done in one go, the tip of the member is not well assured; and with the cleaning of the foreskin, the iron may slip by chance, ruining the work, and many times they are born without needing cleaning and I have seen it. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the modification which is made to all the length of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut evenly both above and below. 
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in I all the while you hold it; but let the thread be well twisted around the leather; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only making them tie the thread around the penis just so, and then let them play in all ways that you can; then let them come between your hands straight, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the children do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and blow on it or breathe on it, and draw it up as high as the head of the penis is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it under the other tie; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly remove the heart from above and draw the head of the penis; then let the blood run little by little, for that is the cure; and put powder on it and on the powder a bandage glued with half an egg cooked with rose water tempered with good fresh rosemary oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.  
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for purification is this: the two jaws should be held and sharp, and the jaws should also be as large as the handle equally. 
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the kernels inside flee at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your knuckle, just as the leus face abscesses; and the cup equally, and if you cannot hold it to your knuckle, take it with tongs, and then cut. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass III days, and what is below the rod is swollen, leave it until the abscess underneath is soothed, and lightly scar it; if you can cut it, then guard yourself from the part of the rod, for it will not harm anything. 
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the place of things within the wound with powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if you cut too deep into the kernel, and it goes above, it will not harm anything; heal it then, as we have said, until it is healthy. 
dou retenement de l’urine	regarding retention of urine 
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a bowel, or a tumor, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, it is fitting that the patient be bent on his knees; and his feet be placed on his back, and he extend his belly above his back, and restrain the patient from stretching as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder will be forced towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is fitting that you administer extraction with an instrument called a "syringe", which has this form: it should be made of thin silver, light and smooth like a bird's feather; and the tube should be a palm and a half long, and thin at the tip.  
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of extracting urine is such that you take a double thread and tie its head to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and push it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk and have the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
des maladies de la vessie	of the illnesses of the bladder 
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, do this with all the instrument which is called a "clepsedre," and it has this form: 
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and its tube is made so that the medicine it carries will be such that it well stops up the penis without addition, so that one can draw out moisture and inject when necessary; and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture and draw with the syringe that is inside; draw the moisture up into the syringe and then push the syringe strongly back in; the moisture will enter inside and come to the bladder now so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: this is it: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of horn, and the head is higher; and below at the breast where the loin joint; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture which you see to enema in the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pot with that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming up, as long as the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly around; then put the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dish, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and we have said the difference between a stone lodged as rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work by incision; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone lodged in the bladder happens more often in children, and it is a sign that sharp pain shoots from the bladder seeming like sharp pain in its subtlety; and it opens the urethra, and grates the patient's penis, and he can urinate many times, and then becomes rigid; and at many of these pains, the urination stops; and healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and is very troublesome for the elderly, and is in the middle for those who are between youth and old age; and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones. 
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by enema, to draw out all the phlegm that is in the bowels. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders the search for the stone. 
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and pull and move them downward so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from there; then have him sit between your hands evenly placed, with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is all sloping downwards; then search for and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut upon the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if you do not feel it at all by touching, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is feverish, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; and insert it into his rectum, and search for the stone; and when you feel it with your finger, hold it at the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and guide it out where you see to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin below the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then he inserts the scalpel cutting, of which this is the form: 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And cut between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and let it be straight upon the stone, and your two hands should be then at the fundament, and let the incision be traversed so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perchance press so the hand which is at the fundament, that it leaps forth without labor; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: if these are grated they are easier to remove; and if there are some which are underneath, similar to a hazelnut, and round, their removal is easier. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	Wherefore then if it has angles and a margin, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you should pull it up with forceps which are also like a file at the head, to pull out the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath a subtle instrument bent at the head; and if you cannot fit it in this way, enlarge the puncture, the opening, and if the stone is sharp, remove it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, then put the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut up above, then pull it out hard, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be sewn and a larger incision made. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because the veins cannot be sutured; but nevertheless, you should strive to draw it out, or break it up with forceps, as much as you can draw it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and remove it, and put a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water on top to soothe the hot abscess; then let the patient rest on his back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if it rises very well from the place of oil and water, then cure it with ointment diaphanicon and ointment basilic, until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, urine which is known in a certain way so that without straining with the urine: put then your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it; then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed; and it must be that every hour when you cure it, that you bind both thighs together, and assemble the medicines upon the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is or leads from the penis and lodges in, and urine cannot pass; so cure this as I have said before, that you cut it many times, and an excuse for the cutting by this cure.  
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have seen this happen myself. 
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron fork according to this shape and let it have three prongs fixed in the fire: 
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the fork into the shaft gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork in your hand within the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone through to the other side; urine will soon come forth, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is quickly broken and comes out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this because something prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and the other above, then cut into the shaft near the stone between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women 
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if this ever occurs, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself to her mirror, especially when she is chaste.  
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of a woman is deeper lodged than the stone of a man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if these necessities arise, it is fitting that you take a midwife who knows well, and at pains one finds her, and if you do not find her, no less a chaste mirror subtle; and present her with a good wise woman in the life of women or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquest of the stone; and look very well whether the woman is a virgin: then she must put her finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it below her finger, and recommend that she put her finger in the malaide, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder formant. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press upon the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, where it is moved and felt, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and make the incision at first small; then put the knife into the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have points. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the likenesses to know the outcome.  
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood comes, put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work; and if the blood comes, and it is from the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the spot and bind it with bandages and cloths, and do not start again with this one, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest the patient die by chance; then treat the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is subsided, and the swelling has decreased, you may return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia 
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white slime that is beneath the heart of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "slime," and it is sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white slime that we have mentioned; and this does not have a prick. 
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is from weakness which comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.  
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is yellowish, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is white slime as we have said, it is a boil of the testis, a long prick as the shape of an egg, and it does not show the testicle, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the very fabric, the abscess reunites with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, it is felt well; then when you see the color of the moisture, test all of the instrument as described before. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside. 
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, it is fitting that the patient be cleansed according to our power and the repletion of his body; then lay him on his back, on something a foot high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the penis towards one of the two ribs of the scrotum; then take the scalpel sharp, and cut the skin of the scrotum along its length up to the groin, and let your incision be straight by dividing the skin of the scrotum up to the white membrane, and flay it subtly according to our power; then pierce the membrane full of fluid with a large hole, and draw out all the fluid, and then put in your ointments, and stretch the membrane upwards; and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the membrane; cut all or piece by piece subtly the side of it, for if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return; and if the egg jumps out during your work, replace it in its place when you have finished the work on the membrane; then unite the two edges of the heart of the testicles with a suture, and then heal it as other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspensory, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the cord at all the suspensory parts, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the artery is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened with rose oil; and put another linen moistened with wine and oil on the two cords, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it all up according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and fill them with finely shredded linen according to this appearance and have them joined together by stitching at the throat of the breeches, one of the ends takes hold onto the base up to the back, and the other to the handle part; and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and let all the restraint be assembled in the loop of the breeches; and sometimes this branch is cauterized instead of being cut with a blade of iron, and it is that you take a subtle culinary cautery, and cut the skin of the cords, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sac containing the artery is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that sac at once, and scald it with this subtle hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in all the ways that you can, so long as you eradicate everything; and keep the fire from touching the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and be careful of running of blood, and milder than the works of cutting; and if anything opposes you, or an abscess breaks or running of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then make a perforation as I tell you, and know that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that rarefied water is there, then let the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the bottom part all along the spatulum wide, and place the perforation as long as the body; and make the opening large so that all the pus may run out; then put cotton on the place and bind it and leave it for the remaining pus to run out, then treat it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not let the pus come out at the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a feather or the instrument with which one treats the pus of dropsy, of which form is before; and enlarge the spot on the wound, and know that the pus returns and gathers after six months or thereabouts, and when it has gathered as before, then the patient will pass his days like this. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the thighs 
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the incision of this branch, fear leads to several complications, for which it seems to me that one should leave it; and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, and especially on the thighs; and this is by many means. 
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by superfluity sour and sharp, which is spread on the thighs, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is a grieving abscess; and by chance are some abscesses grieved painful and hard, and dark colored, and sometimes comes from a new artery, or swelling of a vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a new artery, it is known by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of a vein swelling is known by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and one can well make the cut on this resemblance, and on the other carts; and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then lift the egg high, and draw the thread through the white part, and deliver the suspensoire from all sides of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already soldered with these carts new, then it is necessary that you draw the egg, and cut; and if it is aired in the white part, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut roundly. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cart is or place behind, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and draw out the egg, as we have said. 
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is complete, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the buttocks 
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling a boil, with the softening of the buttocks, and the patient groans when he walks; and the cure of this disease is as much feared as the one before it, nevertheless we will tell you its treatment, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the buttocks down to your thighs, on all the vessels which are near the penis, and hold them, and extend them; then cut with a sharp scalpel in two places, exposing the vessels, then flay from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came, and tie it directly to the other end; then cut them in the middle straight according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound like the others where you use ointment, so that no vessel bleeds, or nourishes one of the buttocks; for by this means there is no harm, and if all the vessels appear visible, it is necessary to drain the buttocks through all the vessels; so that the penis does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be aided.  
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the bone. 
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are by the section that comes or goes to the bone, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that fracture to one of the coions; and this fracture is either of the bone, or of the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes: either from percussion, or from a leap, or from a fall, or from lifting something too heavy, and by similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of the bone are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal even towards the end, because the bone pushes the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the bone, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear different, under the skin nearby, and this is because of the exit of the intestines and the body outside the bone. 
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never disentangle the bowels with the intestine, and it is retained therein, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, even when it is pressed. 
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron out of fear, for which it is convenient to avoid them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is such that you command the patient to knead the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can reenter; then it is squeezed on its neck between your hands and lifted the thighs; then extend the heart above, and cut all the skin of the testicles from length; then put into the folds of the waist a needle according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bones can come out; then flay the fascia that is below the skin of the testicles until the white fascia hard is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger in that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white fascia that is below the skin of the egg, and between the second fascia; and part what is behind the egg, and between the second fascia; and then move with your right hand into the heart of the testicles and extend the white fascia upwards to your left hand, and lift the egg to all the fascia towards the waist; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligature; and see with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped or white hard fascia, and if you find anything, put it in the belly below; then take a needle where it has a thick thread made of 10 threads, and put it into the back part of the fascia, which is after the skin of the testicles; then cut the ends that appear from the threads until there are 4 threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape and tie the fascia, of which we said that it is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of 2 parts; then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them in a form of 2 parts so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, and no abscess comes in; and put on top the ligature according to the first ligature long 2 fingers from it, and after these two ligatures leave the fascia which is below the heart of the testicles the size of a finger; and afterwards all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the testicles until the vein and the artery are severed, as we have said before; then administer wool moistened in oil, and apply it to the wounds, and administer the ligature that we said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white flesh as we have said, after incision, for fear of stopping the blood. 
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the ligature as long as it bleeds through it; and if it is slow to stop, then apply a dressing of hot water, and put on what we have said, until it bleeds; then heal the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia 
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron. 
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done as in the branch which is together with the vein, in part the way you tie the vessels, after cutting above lightly below; then cut in half, and heal the abscess of him who works until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the veins; and no intestines should be drawn out of the joints, and if some are drawn out, it is a small amount, and they rejoin every hour; and however, if it remains too long in this state, the wound or fistula grows, as long as the intestine is drawn out; and this happens by the extension of the fistula which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swells the veins and opens; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: and that is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cauterize the place of the rupture swollen to a width according to the quantity of three fingers; and then draw out the fistula which is under the skin from habit, then take the hot iron and put it on the place appearing of the fistula; and press it down firmly against the belly, then cut the two veins appearing of the fistula on the top of the iron, and cut one and the other; then draw out the top of the iron, and do not cauterize the fistula nor stretch the one or the other, as I have told you in the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, let him dress and heal the wound until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is constrained and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is milder in this place and closer to healing. 
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles 
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the cords that are inside are softened, and it is made to be seen; and it is necessary, when one wishes to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts the softened skin above the natural skin; then brings together the two lips with a suture, and if you see fit, first sew the superfluity of the softened skin in three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread. 
dou chastrement	punishment 
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that punishment is begun in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of it in this book; but it is necessary only for two ways: one of which is that the sick person can answer when asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often have need of the punishment of certain beasts to help us, such as a goat and a sheep and a dog and other beasts. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that punishments are done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, as long as the bowels are softened and hang down; then take them with your hand, as long as they are placed back and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of a beast: it is fitting that you hold the beast and press its skin at its testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each eye with one cut when you have well flayed them; and leave no blemish or delicate blemish which is on the vessels; and this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction some things of the testicles may remain by chance, by which the beast desires lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites 
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodism is according to two manners as men: one so that between the two testicles it appears also as the shape of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes even urinates in the manner. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has upon the vulva also as a penis and two testicles. 
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is such that you cut away all the added flesh, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, men whose urine leaks through the skin of their testicles, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	of the tentativeness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentigene is added flesh upon the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is fitting that you hold the excess of the tentigene in your hand or at your forceps, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep so that blood does not flow forth, then treat it with other cures until it is healed; and for another flesh that grows at the mouth of the womb, and swells, and perhaps bursts, and looks like a cow's udder, and because of this the ancients called it "cow udder disease." 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you treat it as we have said to the tendon, and the treatment until it is healed. 
de erratique	of a wanderer
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is called erratique when the nature of woman is not perceived, or the parts are small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that has come; or by chariot added, or subtle stuff or hope, and it is made perfect in the marrow, or in the ribs, or underneath, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps having flowers; and the knowledge of these is by looking at the belly. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppages are close together, so that they are two or three to the right. 
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is of subtle stuff, and they are close to the two leaves, then hurry and do this: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two leaves, so that the subtle stuff is gone, and the stoppages are removed; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman sleep with a man each day so that she cannot be without. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the bone marrow is hard and thick, it is fitting that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a chariot wheel, suspend it with an awl and cut it; and have medicines to staunch the blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed abundantly with egg white; then apply a cane of lead wide enough so that the wound cannot close; and thus leave it for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then let it be treated by other remedies until it is healed.  
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a chariot wheel comes to the marrow, it is fitting to cut it according to this manner, except if it is an inflamed abscess. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For a festering abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch it with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids 
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; and as we have said in the chapter the resemblances of others, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hardness, when they are perfected in the anus, and they do not appear to the touch, unless it is cured by iron. 
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can feel, are those which one can cure. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore it is fitting that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the hardness with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle powders on medicines that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it goes out, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have cupping glasses applied to his back and breasts without pricking; then take flax, moisten it in plantain juice or ivy juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard head, so you must cover it as I have said for the thelul; and then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow  
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as sores and putrid abscesses and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses which collect pus; and if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.  
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is relieved; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats where he can lean, and support himself on his back and assemble his feet at the parts further from the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then turn him toward the right side, and he will administer the instrument which works the mouth of the marrow, the form of which will come later; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument administered, you insert the point first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary for him to put the funnel of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument. 
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and one presses it gently with the hand, if it is necessary to cover the head, put a bandage on the wound; and when the bowels are emptied, you must put into the wound tents softened in rose oil or green oil; and place the tent firmly from the wound to the margin of the skin, and put over the skin and on the poultice clean linen softened in water where chives or leeks have been cooked; then treat afterwards for two days with ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; and never raise the skin and the wound by an enema of water and honey, and then of water with long-cooked roots of lily and aristoloche; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is rejoined at the skin margin, you must be careful not to cauterize it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth 
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman hurry down, and desire to smell the air: then the child will hasten to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and that the issue is under her head, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press her belly lightly so that the child comes out quickly; for when he descends on his head, the secondine follows with him, and the woman is delivered from her superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes on its feet, and the body or shoulders come out first, or the hands, or it comes on its belly, or backwards, and is converted by chance through its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out on its own head through natural birth and the woman gives birth grievously and her strength is weak, let her sit on a saddle which women hold; and make rise her nature with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, then insert the small spatula between her thighs, of which this is the shape: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the secondine and press at her finger until the moisture that is within runs out; and take hold of the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek broth with sesame oil; then let her drink and sneeze from mustard, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then now she will deliver the child. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out further, then it is necessary that you gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and raise her feet upward; then overturn the stool to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when overturned; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cut the hands with the knife which is mentioned before, and extract the child, and reset it evenly. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the delivery of a child onto its feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, if it is crooked, straighten it up; and then turn it bit by bit until it is straight; then take it by the feet and extend it bit by bit. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to its thighs, if commanded to grasp, and make it sneeze from constraint; if it jumps far, God willing. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not strong as we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it conforms to the natural form. 
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be light. 
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come strong as we have said, take muscilage of hollyhock, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and anoint with this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs; and when she is softened below, make her a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and take hold of her belly lightly, for the child will now jump. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child upon its knees 
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if it puts its hands on its belly little by little; then let it be swaddled upon its neck, and let its feet hang down, and let it lie outside of the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then take its hands onto the belly, and remove the cushions from underneath, as long as it is brought low; and if the child does not jump, then take its feet and move them upwards, then move the belly up, and then push with your hands; and lift the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold on while the child rises. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child who comes forth with one hand hanging down 
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	it is necessary to endeavor to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, let the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, let her lie on the bed and straighten her legs; then administer the muscilage which I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, let her sit on a stool, and then study to bring back the hand; and lift the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on while the child rises. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child upon its neck and has spread its hands and its face turned towards its mother's back 
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is fitting that the midwife holds her hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts it lightly; and when it is equalized, she puts on the natural musky mixture of honey and oil, as we have said, then commands her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a stool, and command her to grasp; and make her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the afterbirth 
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes forcefully in this manner for all the afterbirth, grasp the afterbirth at your fingernail, as long as the moisture is emptied; and if the infant can lie upon its face and upon its neck, grasp it from the shoulder, so that it is not retained, and the infant dies; then push the infant inside, as long as you have put it as it should be, and command the woman to grasp herself several times: then pull lightly. 
de l’issue des gemelz	from the removal of twins 
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and rarely three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. 
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	If they are strange, and do not live, it is seldom named; I know that if they are multiplied, they are separated by the placenta which divides them, which is tied to the belly button; and sometimes they also issue naturally as one under all others, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born crooked, the cure is as we have said, and let the midwife be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do so as it is worth bringing to safety.  
de plusors enfans	of multiple children 
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the midwife knows all this, for adventure similar things happen; if she does according to what is fitting. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child 
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant and there is no expulsion, and you are forced to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any other ailment or fear of death. It is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, with her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised. The minister holds the woman's two thighs so she is tied to the bed so that she is not shaken during the delivery of the child. Then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist oils mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek and flaxseed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and mixtures. Then gently insert her fingers into the midwife's vagina, taking care to place them in suitable places; take care that if the child is seen to descend upon its head, insert the fingers into her eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or in the throat or near the ribs. And if the descent is on its feet, insert it at the knees and midriff; and it is necessary that he hold the finger in his right hand, and place the curve between his two fingers of his left hand, and gently insert it with his whole hand into any of these places that we have mentioned until he reaches the empty space. And this is the form of the finger:  
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place it against the other forceps, or the third if you need them, so that the extraction is equal; and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the forceps have teeth to hold it, as this is its shape: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, anoint the wound with some of its two points of oil, and insert them into that part, and draw out the other part; and if none remains, put these forceps or higher up, and do this until it all comes out. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to tightness, then you must wrap it up in a cloth until it is all out; then hold it at the joint of the palm or at the wrist, and thus you should do the same with the other hand, and the two feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if it has a sharp point assembled, then you should insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, and cut the head and extract the point; or you can cut it with an instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with instruments or chapters that follow this one; and in the same way do so if the infant has a naturally large head; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is extracted with force, split it as much as the moisture that is in its lower part comes out; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as small as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture runs. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, the attraction is slight, and the drawing towards the mouth of the womb is slight. 
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is embedded in the belly or breast, it is fitting that you extract it wrapped in a cloth held on the hand; and pressing the belly or breast, until the moisture which is there runs out; and if the other limbs are removed, and the head remains, then put your hand upon it perfumed with marjoram, and draw it up to the mouth of the marris; then put one or two ounces, and pull hard; and if the mouth of the marris is constricted by a hot boil which has come there, it is not fitting to work on it, but rather to administer moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, and make them soft and moistening. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then apply what we have said in the living child; and if there is no power, then pull it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the afterbirth. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it minister what we said in abscesses which come in the marsh; and if bleeding comes, let it be put in sharp restraint, and minister other remedies. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had been dead, then conceived another upon that one, and brought forth the others dead. 
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came to her buttock, and it swelled so much that it burst open, and she began to have a great discharge. 
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, for the belly has no bones. 
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were the bones of a dead child. 
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I searched the wound and found bones, as long as the woman was in better condition; and I left the woman for a long time like that, and there remained only a little bit of bone at its place; and I have not recounted this chapter except for the fact that when masters find a strange thing they know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the marrow to its place 
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the shape of the pressor, with which we squeeze the books; and at two turns are two heads of two ligatures. 
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than those of the restrictor and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood I should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the trees should be one finger, and a palm and a half long; and between the two ligatures there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which should be fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the marrow to open when you turn the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, of its likeness more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and it has two jaws with two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide; and when you see the vulva open for the whole instrument, make the woman sit on her bed, the feet hanging and the legs open, then push the two adjustments together into the vulva and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand along the whole instrument, as you have done with tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vulva, so long as the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all assembled and their resemblances are multiplied; and when the women have them aligned, the work is so much faster, and higher are men for their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is inexcusable. 
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then cause her to sneeze forcefully, and remove your hands from her mouth and nose; and if she does so, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take a pot and make a hole or cover in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire; then place one end of a cane or tube into the pot and the other end into the mouth of the womb, and hold it there until the vapors enter the womb; then cause her to sneeze as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second bone jumps hastily. 
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not strong, command the healer to moisten their left hand in sesame oil or hollyhock mucilage, and then put it into the wound, and seek the second bone; and when they have found it, grasp it and extend it little by little straight so that the marrow does not break during extraction; but one must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come and loosen. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the marrow is narrow and constricted, we have said the cure is sneezing, and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful not to pull; but it is necessary that he who is at the opening of the marrow, tie it to the thigh of a woman, then give an enema of tetrapharmacon ointment; it will carry it away and put it back in place, and it will become strong. But nevertheless, when it carries it away there comes a bad odor to the stomach and head, and weakens the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is fitting then to use appropriate fumigations for this: none of the ancients have tried a fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retention of flowers and the secundines is this: 
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is shaped like a cane, and one puts the thin end in the opening, and the wide sides over the fire; and let the fumigations be on the coals, until the smoke is gone, and then begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation 
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is blocked by a thin membrane: so it behooves the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp knife, and keep the pressure so she does not touch it; then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will remain in place, put or insert a cane of wood, and leave it for three days, and have it removed when the child wants to go to the nursery. 
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And it sometimes happens that this dislocation comes from the healing of a wound or an abscess; so you must cover that healing: if it is cured, as we have said about the cane of wood. 
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the fundament are swellings and thickenings that come from behind the fundament or in the space between the two parts; if there is one fistula or several; and when this swelling is old, it works, and still moistures ooze white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas persist; and they are known by those who experience discharge or flatulence when the patient makes a bowel movement, and perhaps even jump once.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder and to half of the penis; and they reach as far as the juncture of the thigh, and up to the knee. 
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the fistula penetrating at the base, and not penetrating; and it is that you insert your second finger or thumb into the base, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, then insert a tent of fine linen thread or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and nothing exits in terms of discharge, flatulence, or worms as we have said: know that it does not pierce through; then hasten to cleanse it. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates as far as the bladder or the urethral canal, then the urine leaks out and cannot be retained by medicine. 
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced as far as the joint of the thigh, so the tent comes to the place; if there is no crookedness and the location of the pain is around, then it will be better soon, and no medicine nor ointment is of any use; and in these fistulas that are passing, there is no cure except toil, and vanity of foolish remedies which interfere. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not passing and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced; and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the foundation, it is fitting that you put your two index fingers in, and if you then feel that the tent has pierced it; and be uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then you know that it is passing; if there is no working, one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	We say that one can heal some well, but this happens rarely; and the help one does, if it heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as it is said before; and puts it all hot into the fistula until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know that these bad humors are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather; then cure with bandages softened in butter, until those humors dry out, then cure with ointment joining flesh and soldering.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is good. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the tent enters, and does not reach the bottom which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula under this covering from the heart; then cut off the beginning of the fistula, and put it forward before the tent, and apply the cautery afterward until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and fall away; then cleanse those bad humors that resemble a bird's feather, so that none remain. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if pain comes, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine. 
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For cauterization with fire brings two good things: that is to say, the burning of these charred herbs, and the stemming of blood and drying of moisture; then the treatment of softened tents in butter or crushed hazelnuts, as long as the wounds swell up, and if the flesh burns in the swelling; then treat the wound with ointments made from strong, hard herbs. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament and is distant from the body, put it back in its place with a probe or foundation, and inquire about it.  
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and between it are two layers of cloth or linen or herbs, where it is about to perforate, then there is no other way but a path of trust and hope through the administration of one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to its base, or if you can put tents in and treat them as before; and do not go too deep, lest you cut the ligament that holds the fundament, and voluntary discharges come through the wound; then treat it as we have said. Perhaps it will be healed, or remove the covering and cleanse it after it is cut away from the fundament, either by a tent or another pointed instrument; then cleanse the faulty flesh that is in the wound as much as you can; then try to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part behind the fundament: this would be easier for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side near the base under the skin above, then take a pierced tent at its head according to this form: 
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put the twisted thread in two, and put the tent on all the thread into the fistula until it is at its head. 
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin near the base inside, then draw out the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger or the base; and take hold of the head of the thread, and join the two ends together, and pull one against the other, and leave it for one or two days; and restrain it sometimes, until the threads catch those scars which are between them, and tighten; then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.  
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too tight. 
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to make a bandage too tight, then apply a remedy as we have said, until it is healed. 
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spathicula used to make a fistula must be very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, because you should not cut what you ought not to cut as you see here: 
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they often bleed, and there may be one or several, and they protrude from the fundament and at its head; but those which protrude have little moisture, and sometimes bleed a little or secrete a little yellow fluid, and they have the color of flesh; and the cure for those who have them inside the fundament is that you order the patient to strain to go to the bathroom, as long as the fundament relaxes and the threads appear; if he hesitates, and it can be grasped with tweezers, or held by your fingernail, then cut it at its roots; and if the thread cannot be held because of moisture, grasp them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them off, and sprinkle some hot powders that are in place of a cautery on top; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure them with other remedies until they are healed; and if the fundament cannot relax, give the patient an enema of a sharp and sour purgative to cleanse what is in the fundament so that it can come out openly; when the patient strains, and the threads are loose from the fundament, the cure is easy; and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them off, then cure them as we have said until they are healed, and he fears incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is fitting that you administer the suture according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and if it be wide; and remove the formed thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others, and leave one to correct the excess blood; then put on the foundation a softened cloth moistened in rose oil or cerate, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let it be until they fall out, and when they have fallen out, cure them with ointment and other cures, until it is healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	on the drying of the wounds or foundation  
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying of wounds in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no avail. 
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary, you should scrape off the bark with the point of a knife or your fingernail, so that it does not become moist; then treat it until it is healed as it should be; and if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and is scraped, then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	You tremble. 
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formication is a small false appearance under the skin, and it goes very far apart; and one never finds it cold, and one also feels it as if dead with trembling, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that cane on top of the trembling, so that the circles completely surround the trembling; then turn your hand around the whole cane until you grasp all around the trembling, and put it very far, and uproot the trembling from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above: 
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, for it must hold onto the pain, and press. And if you see, do this cauterization of the tremor, as it is before or chapter of the cautery. 
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a clyster 
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or artichoke, or of melted iron or malleable; and sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then that are administered in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.  
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster, small and large, is wide above, where the belly is tied according to this manner:  
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a severance where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and it has on one side two holes, and on the other one; and the belly is where one puts the medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there is a space of one finger between each hole, then put into these holes a strong thread of raw silk twisted in X or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then administer an enema; and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently; then hold the syringe in both hands together until all is filled, then extract the enema, and have the patient raise his legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it flow as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is of greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply a clyster for a disease of intestinal blockage, and the medicine hastens to pass, then repeat it until it is cured. 
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if hemorrhoids are at the base or an abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of a subtle clyster on which the skin should be drawn out: 
des plaies	of wounds  
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places or parts where the wounds are made, and by what they are made. 
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by a blow of a stone, and a cut of a sword or knife, or lance, or club, or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for remembrance will come in its chapter.  
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you are careful it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: then make it heal quickly from the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood from the wound, and let the healing be on the contrary side of the injured part; and forbid the patient to eat wine and rich meats.  
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not want to heal, let his food be reduced and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if a hot abscess should come, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if he who has it has moved it, put some ointments on it until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a swordsman's cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by stitching, then assemble them with sutures as I will say for abdominal wounds and their suturing. 
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and it can be grasped but only by a single point, then cauterize it; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as beef and boiled wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotting flesh and it does not reach the bone, then cauterize all the rot thoroughly and deeply, and treat it afterward; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound which, without cutting, cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie off the artery; and if you find it dislocated, tie it with thread; and if this does not work, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder on it which will bind it together so as the fire has melted it. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powder it subtly, and apply it to the wound, and bind it firmly, as long as it heats well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes this with quicklime alone, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has melted the wound. 
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has melted the wound, immediately in this way, one does not put this powder on it; but puts some digested ointments or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it flows freely; then cure it with other cures until it is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you here after about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck 
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut. 
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to let the wound heal and apply nothing constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain which is the highest member; but let the medicine be below, such as chamomile washed in clear water, and mixed with rose oil, and also comfrey washed in clear water, and other mineral stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.  
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed. 
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is raised and full of pus, pierce it lower; and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes forth, bind it, tie it off, and cauterize it as needed; and if the spine in the throat is cut, or the heart, and the passage is kept closed so that the meat goes through, sew the heart onto the neck bone and do not touch the throat but put it back together according to its natural shape; then remove it carefully and leave it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, carve it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out with tongs as much as you can, and those that you cannot get, leave them until the wound rots, becomes detached, and its path is clear; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on the powder I have mentioned. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in this chapter. 
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a spear or knife wound 
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is wind coming from the wound while the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder in it for the first hour, nor bind it because the blood will not flow freely, return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment and bind it twice a day; and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four or more; if there is no spasm, trembling, evil heart, or strangeness of breath; then when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.  
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Heal then with tents and other cures, as long as it heals; and if it cannot heal, know that there is a fistula; if the cure is as one should. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the front, back, or side; if the cure of that which is in front; if it is large, by suture; and if it is small, by powder; and if it penetrates the bone, and has broken pieces, then wash the wound, and treat the fractures if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound rot so that the extractions are easier; and for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	of rupture of the belly 
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Ruptures of the belly are large, medium, and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, allowing entry for others; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it is more difficult to put the intestines back in unless they are returned one by one, because the intestine swells quickly when it feels cold and does not go back in easily. Therefore, a medium-sized wound is preferable because one can return the intestine to its place as with others. And know that rupture of the belly occurs according to four manners: the two common sutures occur at the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and the other two proper sutures are common to other wounds; and nevertheless they are cleaner with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines is protruding, and there is little to put back in place, it can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in two ways: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in lukewarm water squinant and cypress and spikenard, and lift the intestines as long as the swelling is removed; and never do this with restraining bandages, but loosen them so that there is only gentle pressure to reduce swelling. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with lukewarm water or broth if they are cooked, for this widens the entrance to receive things; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is looser than the size of the wound so that we should not cut except in great necessity; and these are the instruments for splitting: if you cut inside the curve and do not go beyond, and see this shape: 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you can put them back into their natural form in their proper place, do so, for this is worth much. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your understanding into this so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in large and small wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds put what seems fitting to you, then have in your hands a minister who holds the entire rupture with his hand, and brings together the lips; and this is the common way of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and put in a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is below the skin within, as far as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew together four-fold; then draw it tight with a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two edges of the wound evenly, and then leave a space of two fingers, and put in another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need needles, as long as the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles pierce all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is fitting that they are medium-sized; and it is not fitting to push the needles too far from the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture; and then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths at the ends of the needles for them to hold, and leave them as long as the wound is healed; and this way of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for in it one uses a needle or two.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I put the intestines back in place after they had been out for 24 hours and the wound was sutured for 15 days and I treated it and he was healed.  
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And those who saw him thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until he was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and pass it from the outer part to the inner part; when it has pierced through straight, take the head of the thread or twine or whatever you have passed the needle through and make it pierce through on the other side from the inner part to the outer; and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furriers do with furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the whole suture is completed. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is this as some do, who bring together the two parts naturally, and apply one end of the thread to the other end, in this way: put a needle or the end of a thread close by, and pierce that place only, and leave the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pierce it from the further part until it is inside, with the two ends of the thread; then pierce one and the other from the further part until it is inside, in two other ends of the thread which are on the other side; and this is the gentler manner of suturing and the most common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and some testify to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one must put one needle in on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than in other places of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of a wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as if the fire has moved it, so replace the intestine and the suture; then put on powder containing charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound swells; and sew the thread, and let the siphons and the mirach be soldered; then treat the wound as other wounds until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to swell, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of other medicine in several positions unless the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause contagion to the main members, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil, or in rose oil, and put it around the groin, and under the armpits; and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then give enemas of warm red wine, and similarly if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines; and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the fineness of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gut protrudes from the wound, put it back as you would the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must bind the place which is black so that blood does not flow into it, because there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the ligatures, and hang the two ends down from the part below the wound until it comes out to ease the extraction when the gut bursts, and the wound opens. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it festered and became a fistula, and there was discharge from it and flatulence; I treated it according to what I could, and did not stop trying to heal it until it was healed, and the edges were joined. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it soldered, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and he did not have any pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be tied in this way: take tweezers with large heads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the tweezers have opened the mouth, place them on the two lips so that they tighten their mouths; and then cut off the head, and this remains so that it cannot loosen, then put another tweezer afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is all closed up; and sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	These heads burn in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the head of this intestinal thread that has been well stripped, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread twisted together, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in the rupture; and this manner of stitching with tweezers is nothing more than according to the way of skill and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no remedy or healing except subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be 
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula," and even when it is healed and goes inward. 
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to its greenness, a hard and white nodule, where no pain is felt, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird; sometimes it has a clear opening inward, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times large enough. And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is due to one of the nine causes: namely, by the thinness of blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, which does not allow flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or because the wound is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the nature of the region is slow to digest and heal, and swells by nature; or because there are veins or bones. And I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and their cures with medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is made by handwork. 
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens to come to the principle quality of the primary member, and similar things. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are grievous to heal, and there is nothing else except labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the place I have said, and you are confident in its cure and you see it known, take a probe of iron or brass, if the fistula is straight; and if it is crooked, use a subtle probe of lead, for lead bends easily around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it by probes, cauterize it through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then lance it freely according to your ability, so that you know whether there are bones or nerves, and it is cleansed perfectly, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut it according to what I have told you, and remove the corrupt matter and the decayed flesh that are inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, it is necessary that you cut deeply as much as you can, then put softened probes soaked in medicinal water into it, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments promoting healthy flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away.  
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If veins or nerves do not hinder you or the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, dig out all the corruption until it is entirely removed, then treat the matter with healing remedies until it is healed; and if it is not healed and returns to its former state, know that you have not gone far enough: dig deeper and clear as much as you can until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is healed in this way, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with forceps, extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, treat them all the same way, and do not leave any; and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut through the moisture and flesh and free the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting rot on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will be removed more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, let the corruption only continue until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound; and if there is a large part that is corrupted and comes to the marrow of the bone, then you must sew and cover everything up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is joined; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but those who looked after him foolishly worked so much on it that they opened the abscess, and they corrupted much of the matter, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings from which they all flowed with pus and moisture from the body; and many healers treated him for two years, and he had no success in the art of hands until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and those who corrupted it through the openings into a large body; and the flesh of the young man became red, and had a citrine color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I hammered a tent into one of these holes, and then I examined all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all sides of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried then, and probed into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came to the bone inside; I cut away what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and I began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, and could not solder it; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing into the bone, and cut it away, and tried to solder the place; but I could not until I probed around a palm of the bone, and cut away all its marrow, then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and soldered quickly, and did not need to be started again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation often bled, but he was healed completely and in place of the bone a hard flesh was born, and was of good disposition and had neither harm nor anything contrary at all, neither going nor coming. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: take a linen cloth and bind it to the head of the bone that appears, and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another woolen cloth larger than the first cloth, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the head so that you draw down the corrupted flesh, and uncover the flesh in the place where you see that it must be treated so that the silk does not stain the flesh; and put a coal or a plank under the bone to help burn the corrupted flesh; and it must be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and treat again another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then put a hot coal underneath, and then from one part to the other burn the corruption, and let the burning be as long as the corruption is deep, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and burn the bone where it contains on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut it through; and if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or at the wrist of the foot, then it is a very serious thing, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not prevent you from doing so; and know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and the appearance of them, their thickness and their subtlety, their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each semblance of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument that you need accordingly. 
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The flesh rots either from within or from without; and when you have medicine that corrodes through the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, it is necessary to cut off that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death, or from malice, which is greater, from the lack of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and swells after the blackness, then goes that corrosion from member to member, and takes hold of the whole body; if you hurry in cutting off, and if it is from the sting of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the toe, cut it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.  
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, cut it off at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut it off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no other remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and do the same thing when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cut it off after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it rises to the leg, cut it off at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to leave the patient to death; and the manner of cutting off or sewing up the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister's bandage below, and another minister's bandage above, and you sever the flesh that is between the two bandages at a span wide, so that the bone is uncovered; then cut it off or sew it up, and put on each side a cloth of linen, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy place, and brings the patient other injury and abscess.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs while you are working, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first came on the back of his foot, so that it spread throughout his entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cut off his foot, and it was healed; and long afterwards the corrosion returned to the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I put repelling things on him after cleansing his body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repelling the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the man's strength was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and it was healed; and I do not tell this story except so that others may do the same, if they need to. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in fleshy places and stays so long that it gathers a large amount of pus; and then it bursts and discharges, and the pus runs out, and the wound remains open like a vessel; and the skin which is above is as thin as linen cloth, and does not go down to the bone nor to the nerve, and such a sickness is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin if you cut it all around, even when it is thin like linen cloth; and it does not open because of its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are sure that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like flesh, then cure it with an enema thus: see if the breast is large, and the pus which is in it has a foul odor, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take alum, oil, and litharge, equally, and put them into a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need and mix it with water and honey, and give it as an enema into the breast, drawing out the pus; and leave the medicine in for two hours, and then remove it while squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the odor is removed; and never give an enema of water from ash when this medicine is not present, but take ashes from vine wood and pour water over them, then strain it and give it as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water from ash, then give an enema of water and honey in which there is a pinch of powdered litharge; or give an enema of honey and mead wine which has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the breast breathe; and when you have done this and are sure that the breast is well cleansed, then give an enema of something that produces flesh in it, and take a diachylon plaster and mix it with rose oil and wine; or give an enema of some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of their properties or have treated them in the book on ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter, enlarge it a bit with an iron instrument and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too large, sew it and leave only one place where the enema can enter, and if the opening which discharges pus is above, cut it or a lower place than it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowel is in perfect condition, do not allow char to enter it; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, arrange it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is. For when the bowel is perfect, do not allow char to enter and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, arrange it in this manner: so that the bowel runs lightly down, and leave nothing of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy part, and spread them on a linen cloth that covers all the healthy part; then cover the strongest place around the perforation of the breast so that it is larger than the first one, then spread ointment frequently on the other cloth according to the quantity of the perforation, and put it on the perforation of the breast to align the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once; and the one that is on the perforation of the breast, remove often to remove the bowel, and know what runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough, whether digested or undigested; and take care whether the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not; and when your medicine has been spread in this manner and you see the nature that leaps on the perforation of the breast, know that the breasts are already healing, and approaching health; and then untie it in the morning, or the third day; and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast feels bloated and undigested after many days, know that the breast is not healing. 
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men in whom the healing of the wounds lingers, and others who heal quickly; and if the breast remains swollen and undigested after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast is slow to heal and becomes hardened, apply drying medicines, moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diachylon ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol and is the last medicine. Take diachylon ointment and make it with rose oil, and rosewater equal in quantity; then cook it and use it; and when diachylon ointment is not present, take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is taken off the fire; then spread it on linen and apply it to the breast. And sometimes administer long aristolochia and roots of celestial lily, which are also like flour of vetches and centaury; and use them either simple or compound: grind them and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger 
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A boil is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or by chance it arises on other toes; and when it is envied, and no heed is paid to it, then it comes a large abscess, and runs and discharges pus as much as it runs to the root of the finger, and by chance runs all the way; and corrosion comes up to the bone, so that there is foul-smelling pain, and the flesh of the toe is swollen, and the color is dark. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity that remains from the fingernail, then cauterize the wound afterward.  
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses the flesh, and begins to grow in, and the wound, then it is necessary that you put a wedge under the nail so as not to prick the flesh, and push it up, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and apply on the remaining flesh medicinal burning and corrosive agents to remove all; then treat with ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and treat it deeply, for as long as the corrupted bone is there, it cannot heal; and if you see the corruption spreading, cut into it in one of the ways previously mentioned, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is hard, swollen, and the patient feels great pain, you must first heal it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the deafness of the hand 
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The boils that are born on the hands of some men are sometimes all fleshy, and sometimes there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none others are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some parts of the fingers. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in any new part of the body do not move, and those who are born at the joint of a bone may move; the size of that which is fleshy so is light, in this manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure; if you hold them, cut them off. 
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For that which is born on the bone or in any new part, it is fitting that you first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone at a suitable size for that, then cure it until it is healed. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come at the bones together come by birth, or by swelling of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things. 
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is fitting that you cut that swelling so that the bones repair according to their natural forms; then put between two bandages or cloths softened in rose oil, so that they do not swell together; or you put between two pieces of fine lead, as long as the flesh is joined together, as it should be. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a wound comes to any of his limbs with the palm, then treat that wound as it should be treated. 
des vils	some old ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large swollen vessels full of melancholic superfluities which come in many parts of the body; and they occur more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer to him sometimes purging with colocynth, and then the herb basil.  
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is according to two manners: one is that you cauterize them and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you tie off the vein and cauterize it all.  
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	Bloodletting is done in this manner: First raise the leg with very hot water so that the thick blood becomes thin, then strain the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee; then cut a vein in one, two or three places, making a wide incision. Then draw and let out the black blood with your hand, from one side to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; then tie it off and instruct him to abstain from meat containing black cole; and begin again the evacuation and the healing when the veins are full, and harm the patient.  
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the limb is according to this manner: take the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red, and swells the veins; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then apply to the place near the long bone at the top of the knee, or in the lower part below the ankle; then cut the skin with a knife and flay the vein from each side, until it appears when touched; and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems as a white rope; then push the arrow under it, until it is raised out of the skin, and then apply it to the knife lightly, and then apply it in another place above it three times; then flay the skin on the vein until it appears, and lift it with the arrow, just as you did, and apply it to another knife, just as you did first; then apply another incision, or more if needed, and lift it, and apply it to the bone of the foot, and pull and lift until the second incision; then extract it from incision to incision, until it comes out entirely, and then apply it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, push a needle through all its strong thread double, tie it, and pull it, and push it under the arrow, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, because if it breaks, you can neither pull nor lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put wool moistened with wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it completely; and treat it as we have previously said. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved and does not cut completely unless it cuts the vein; and it is of a large curve because if it were delicate, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the form: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body snakes and worms, embedded between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then the flesh changes color, and the vein begins to come out, just like the root of a plant. 
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder is open, it is fitting that you wrap around a piece of flax from three and a half to eleven and a half finger-widths, tie a knot, and leave the flax hanging on the leg, and every time it becomes detached, you should wrap it again around the flax and tie a knot; and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root as long as it is all coming out; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction or pus, and evil disease; therefore it is fitting that it should be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains but flesh; and sometimes this vein when it is treated is five handbreadths long, or ten, and one man once came to me, whose was ten handbreadths long, and when you cut it, it will spurt one or two finger-widths, and pierce it through to the bottom so that everything comes out; and let the matter which is inside be emptied, and apply medicines that prevent putrefaction every day, then treat the wound as you would an abscess. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein more than twice, and likewise when it opens at the joint of the foot or leg, and there comes much discharge, and from which it leaps again; treat it then as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land “beef disease” because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and the man feels it well from limb to limb as long as it is going beneath the skin where it travels, and jumps far; and it arises from the putrefaction of some humors, just as come worms and snakes and lampreys and roundworms or stomach worms; and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body and ascends to the head and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens often. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cured and draining, it cannot be removed unless it goes: so it must be that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight tie, then cut upon it and drain it hard, and if the worm is hidden in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it runs to the eye as we have said: and if you see it coming or near the eye, remove the eyebrow below it and cut upon it, and drain it hard. And it behooves the patient to cleanse the body with dissolving medicines for putrid humors, and to beware of meats that cause decay. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain which comes from windiness. 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain which comes in some members, and then can move from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; and just after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm on her shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that place and stuck in her shoulder, and then a little while after ran through all her body, until it reached her other arm; then she told me that it was now turning around her body, just as I saw. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner. 
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had seen many who had felt pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and therefore this constrained wind appeared; and it does not appear in this way in those who are fleshy and have moist bodies and full veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then cauterize on top until this windiness constrained in place is forced out; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then use a remedy from those who expel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, serpent pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in bodies where they lodge. 
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and barbed, and socketed; and those which have two angles, and those which have flanges, and those which have pieces; and those which lodge in any member lodge according to two manners: either in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the arrowhead is in any part of the limb and the signs of death which I will tell you later appear to you, it behooves you that you abstain from extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways; and when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrowhead is lodged and pierces the bone and the dura mater which is above the brain is severed, is when there is darkening and stupor and turning green and redness in it, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it flows without force from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and there oozes moisture white in appearance like pus from the wound, and it also burns like fire. And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and leave the arrow where it is if it is not embedded. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seizure when it falls or strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the seizure moves just like a pulse, and brings forth black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death follows. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the body is that without spurting of foam it leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and desires cold air. 
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls in the covering of the buttock, it is below the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders move. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls in the stomach, perhaps something of the undigested flesh leaps from the wound.  
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow lodges in the gut or stomach, and it does not pass through the intestine, there is no hope for a cure, nor for extracting the arrow. 
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine flows and starts to leave, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal. 
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several positions. 
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you how it happened to me so that you do otherwise. 
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow struck or lodged near the tear duct in the root of his nose; I tried it and drew it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any harm. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he treated with a game a dart that had fallen into the fat of the eye below the paper below, and the dart was filled, and could only reach its point towards the fire, and it was a dart large as a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; the game was healed, and no evil accident befell him. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And he treated a dart from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic dart with ears: I shaved the beards, and I refined as much as I extracted it, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And he treated a dart to a man that had fallen on his belly, and I thought he would die; and then after he had passed XXX days, it did not change his disposition; I cut above the dart, and I hooked it, and extracted it forcefully, and he did not have any bad accident. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man into whom an arrow has fallen or gone in, and the wound was sutured over it; and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural position, nor found any harm in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you see another man into whom an arrow has fallen in his face, and the wound was sutured; and it remained thus without suffering great pain; and many other similar cases. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow for a prince of the king, which had fallen between his nose, and there was a slight decline to the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded. I was called upon to treat it after it had fallen for three days. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.  
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it with great subtlety, and did not feel it at all; and he felt numbness and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of an arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put on the plaster for several days, and stitched up the wound completely, and kept the patient a long time like this, until he felt the arrow one day inside his body; and he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine sharp and corrosive for several days, until it was opened, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow moving in its place; then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and it healed well within four months, and then I enlarged the wound so that I could put in the forceps, and move it from one side to the other, and it would not come out; then I did not cease to refine and engineer different ways of instruments, until one day I took it with forceps well made, according to its form which will be shown at the end of this chapter, until I drew it out and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the master judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, because books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare with very little great things, and with what is present and lacking, find nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign objects which occur in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not leave the limbs where they are stuck except according to two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and the one that leaves by the place where it enters is an arrow embedded in the flesh, and rarely comes out now.  
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it rots and the opening widens; and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce around it with a very fine tool until the flesh around it is enlarged, and then remove it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone near the head and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: do not remove it at all, but leave it until it becomes level after several days, for if the arrow comes close to there, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not go as far as there, and the patient remains for several days without any bad accidents, then begin the process of removal. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck like this and cannot come out with force, then administer bandages around it, as I told you; then treat the area until it is healed. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in a place in the body where you cannot see it, then probe it with all your strength; and if you feel it, extract it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen the wound until it is large enough; and extract the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow that hold it in place, then remove the flesh that is stuck around it from both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow so that you might extract it more easily. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the flesh around it is rotten, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood is contrary to you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and put whatever you can to move the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell upon him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that has come from another side, where it appears nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in the place if one can see or feel it apparently: then cut upon it as much as the pincers can grasp and then extract it; if it jumps now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out. 
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then begin the extraction again until it comes out forcefully; and if there were an arrow in it, push it all the way through; and if it were a bone, and you see that pushing is required, use an instrument with a pointed head so that the point of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument; and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is lifted, push the instrument with the point entering in, to make the extraction easier. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cover over it, do so; and beware of covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound, if necessary; and care for it until it heals. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape: 
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of making them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed end is also like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as here is the shape: 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the forceps for pushing and pulling is this: 
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body 
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there are XVI in the head, namely: II arteries that are behind the ears, which are called the two “herbech”; and the II arteries that are in the II temples, appearing; and II veins that are in the II corners of the II eyes, which are called “aspires”; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the head above the nose; and the II guindeges that are at the neck; and the II veins that are on the lips above the mouth, these are the veins that are called “augeherich”; and II veins that are below the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly heals are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and common people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one from which one heals, which appears manifestly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvation vein is the one which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the pocket on the left side, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The cutting of the veins that are behind the ears helps against old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I told you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two hanging folds from the head: hold them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, it is a sign to cut there; then take the lancet, and put it under the vein down to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well two fingerbreadths across, and make blood come out until you see enough; then bandage and tie it, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines, and chronic, and habitual ophthalmia, and for a body with sharp tears; and the quality of the bloodletting is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens his neck so that the two veins appear openly; and he feels the thumb under his finger, and then signs to begin; then he lifts the heart above the vein at the top with his index finger, and pushes the lancet underneath, and lifts the vein at the top, and cuts it, as you have done in the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your need; then loosen the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie it up, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, as at the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the bleeding of the cephalic for diseases of the face that are old, and for migraine, and for redness. 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then loosen the patient's collar and bind the vein until it is tight and never open it again with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not right that the flame be too strong; and bind it askew, for the bone is nearby, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle. 
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The binding of the two veins which are in the two temples helps against boils, and tinea, and redness, and inflammation in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their binding is that the patient twists his neck with some cord, as before; then bind it, and let the binding be across, a prick through the length of the flame a prick wide, for there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is delicate, it may break; then make a bandage of cloth soaked in blood, as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and bind it well. 
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bloodletting from the vein at the temple is good for fevers and strong headaches, and for facial diseases such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, even when it is old; and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient squeezes his neck, then he pulls his nose to your left hand, and takes a long delicate flame and sticks it just above the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well easily, and the blood will start running now.  Do not go too far with it; make the blood run according to your need, then tie it up for a night because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The sinew of two guindeges helps in the constriction of the urethra, and at the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for empetigine, and for corrodens, and for herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the sinew is such that the patient draws his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat, then he cuts the vein along one piece widely, then draws out the blood temperately, or as much as necessary; then redo it in the other vein, then untie the string, and remove all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and leave him until morning, so that the wound may heal. 
de la sainie des leivres	Of sinews from hares. 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sinew of the veins of hare's lips above helps for a cold sore in the mouth, and for gum disease, and fissures of the lips, and teeth and throat pain. 
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the vein is to make the patient sit in front of you and pull out their neck as I have said; then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them because they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: so cut both, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and just as well do the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same way. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the vein below the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The vein below the tongue helps after the cephalic vein and it is for constriction of the throat and eye diseases and mouth diseases; and the quality of the bleeder is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein: cut both, and do not go too deep, because there are arteries below. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins from which we commonly bleed are bled in two ways: either by pricking with a wide, sharp flame-tempered knife, or with a subtle olive instrument like cutting knives; and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame-tempered knife is very well known, and it is as wide as you see: 
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary for opening the large, full veins containing thick and cloudy blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped knife: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle, citrine blood. 
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are below the throat, or neck, or chest, or belly; and it behooves the bleeder to bleed moderately, and to be wary of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and bleeding comes, then it must be cauterized as I have said; and the flame should not be stabbing but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must extract it and change to another; or if you want none of its vein, or you make a vein in its place on the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with a knife flame as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then it is fitting that you extract the arm, so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with a scratch, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife flame; and beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for that is an artery: wipe it then. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: hasten then and put your finger along its length, and remove your finger if the bleeding stops; for this often happens; then bind up the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it for the patient; be without fear and do not move it until it is healed.  
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped and it comes back to you, and the medicine is not present to you, then bind the artery if it appears, for the head of the retractor; and stop the bleeding. 
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark of a fig tree and cut it, and take one of the halves and tie it on well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, apply the cure as we have said, with powders which stop blood; and the stopping is not bad in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the bandage on the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle helps it to draw blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the healer to beware of the nerve which is below, and if he points too much with the instrument and finds the nerve, it will swell and the healing will be spoiled, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some men because of its subtlety, then you must heal it with an instrument that has been dulled; and avoid the nerve as best you can. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then he should make a long incision. 
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic helps it to draw blood from the head, and aids as well; and it behooves one to heal it by pointing at the flame of olive or myrtle, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery below. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not be troubled if one must attempt the first time, and begin again; and by chance the place swells for some men when one must attempt the first time, but it does not matter. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the incision is according to your thought. 
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is performed only to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses; and whether the bloodletting is done in one of the three veins which are: namely, cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and it should be done at the beginning of spring for young people, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; and it should be done on the first day or the third, after two hours or three. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding that is administered to the sick has no determined hour, but only when need be by day or by night, in all hours and at all times; and it does not suit to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying fruit before the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should one bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years. 
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be bled, in any manner that it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse their bowels with a light clyster, if they have retained much phlegm, so that the veins do not draw from the bowels the putrid superfluities harmful to the principal members; nor should one bleed someone who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as they are intoxicated, nor those who are dropsical; and one should avoid bleeding after colic passions, vomiting, discharge from the belly, and multiplication of seed in women, and exertion, and wakefulness, and fasting, and those who have lost much strength, or by something of war or body; then subdue the humors, if they are gross, by meats and drinks and medicines if you have them; then enter a bath if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein of the left arm around the third hour as we have said; and keep yourself that day from work, and exertion, and luxury, and similar things; and be calm and joyful, and let the bleeder be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow; then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell, and are felt; then moisten the bleeder's knife flame with a drop of old oil, then put your index finger of your left hand below the place one fingerbreadth where you want to bleed, so that the vein does not move when it is cut. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as quickly as strings in a snare, and if some are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore it behooves that the bloodletters be advised in these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, begin again a little below that place or above hastily, if the veins are not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the vein is swollen, and the patient faints, leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will come; do not enter a bath, then begin the bloodletting again if it pleases him; and if the opening is small, or if you cut subtly with your knife and you doubt that it will not issue as much blood as you see, apply all the flame directly to that opening itself; and work quickly so that the vein is swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not begin the lancing again, and put a poultice of oil on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and the oil in this place makes the poultice; and thus administer the poultice of oil in each vein that you lance, to staunch the flow of blood; and this same does triacle and broth of them, when one puts it on the place; if subtle the blood and it separates when it is too thick. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, even when it is not lanced more than once or twice and the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened in water and salt, a hot poultice, and leave it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains on the place after several days without any blackness or greenness, do not harm it; and if you see, put on something of aloes or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mustard, or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the incision of the basilica; put then your hand on it, and if you find the place soft under pressure from your hand, that appearance is bad. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then putting anything of what we have said on it, for you might by chance cut an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood. 
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down. 
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, to make a wider incision and let the blood flow freely; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled frequently in small amounts, and it should be done by cutting across, not straight down. This method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage and is better than a long or deep cut.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body lacks blood during bleeding, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is hot, draw blood three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, before the bleeding he should eat softened bread in thick syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the bleeding, after a lot of blood has been drawn, it is fitting that he inhales broth of meat and subtle aromatic syrup, and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.  
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to have his arms opened and bleed again, it is fitting, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his continuing strength. 
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to bandage his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, if he bandages seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour. 
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another place, he should bleed on the second day or the third. 
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood in the body that has already been heated and causes fever; so it behooves you to draw out a large quantity and widen the opening as much as it bleeds freely; then after you have followed all the conditions of bleeding, put your hand on his pulse while he bleeds so that death does not come instead of blood, and this happens often when the bleeder is negligent; and it is not right when you see him untie his arm and let the blood out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press hard upon it; nor if it is curved, that he stretches out his arm hastily, for that would be wrong; but leave it as long as it bleeds the second time; or apply the point of a flame to it until the cold blood at the vein's opening comes forth freely, and put a small piece of silk sharpened to a point on it and press lightly.  
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased. 
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm. 
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein at the back of the arm is healthier than the vein on the head because it is thicker. 
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of drawing blood is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the pulse is red, then it is tied moderately so that the vein appears well, then the blood is drawn across, not wide nor long; and the opening should be wide, and the blood drawn very close to the joint of the hand; and if none can come out, the hand is put back into hot water and the blood allowed to run into the water until you have enough; and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back into hot water at all, for it is done more in winter than in summer; and the drawing of blood from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither artery nor nerve there. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sinew of the salvation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; and if the sinew is sideways, and if you cut it from end to end, it does not grieve anything; and do not go too deep into the flesh, for the nerves are under all naked of skin, and then put the hand in hot water, if the sinew freezes in the wound, and cannot come out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and wax on the vein to solder quickly, and do so for each vein. 
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sinew in the left hand is worth for the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you about the right. 
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The venom of the viper is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and legs ancient, and similar diseases. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its venom is that the patient puts his foot in sharp hot water, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and by above the foot there go many reins; therefore heal the larger vein or at the ankle which moves best. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and the healing must traverse as in copying; and let the flames be anesthetized. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back in the hot water and let the vein empty well. 
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the sinews fail the first time, start again a second time above a spot, for the muscle is salty; and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do the same to the shinbone of the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The muscle of the sciatic vein is at the ankle strong, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its sinew is such that the patient enters or bathes, and squeezes above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then squeeze the sinew in all the ways that you can, and by crossing it; and it is worth more that you cut it, for the muscle is underneath, and it is very full of blood for most men. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then squeeze any vein of it that opens or behind the two feet, and toward the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and draw as much blood as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and remove it; it is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping glasses 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cups are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking. 
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done without pricking is done in two ways: either with all fire, or without fire; and cupping which is done by pricking and drawing blood is done on fourteen points of the body, of which one is on top of the head; and the other at the nape of the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and a cup under the chin; and cups on both shoulders; and a cup on the buttocks; and cups along both arms; and cups on both legs; and cups on both ankles; and cupping does not draw blood except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it weakens no one, as is done with bleeding from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with all fire nor without fire, in any illness which comes from repletion, until all the humors are evacuated. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness, or by custom, to cup, let us administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and both and in any time; for there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; and there are some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and on their neck, and darkness on them; and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swelling of the tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see by night blood and sadness and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and immediately when it is the middle of the month, we order them not to be cupped after three hours of the day. 
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps against the headache... that comes to them, and it is not right that this be after the evacuation of all the body; and this cupping is in place of the bleeding from the cephalic vein, and it is not right that he who is of cold complexion uses it, or who has diarrhea, for it does them great harm; and for this reason it is not right that old men use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a bit lower due to the doubt of oblivion. 
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping on the neck is in place of the healing of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for constriction of the breast, and for a fissure in the canal of the lung, and all that, and for repletion; and a little should be applied, because if it holds too firmly, it will cause oblivion or stomach or heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Cupping on the second ribs of the neck is good for headaches, ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the healing of the basilica; and you must instruct the patient to press his hand upon it, so that he does not sever the artery, and no flow of blood occurs. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The application of cupping under the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and for gum disease, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is applied where there are sores on the two lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping on the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and swelling. 
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Cupping on the elbows is as good as three veins in the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the healer that he does not apply too much force, because the flesh is thin there, and underneath are nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	A cup applied to the buttock is good for hemorrhoids in the fundament and for illnesses beneath it; and it must be that the cup is large, and made of iron, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break and make great wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the cupping glasses on the legs bleed openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the loins, and the bladder, and the spleen; and loosen the flowers; and are placed on both thighs, and both ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring on wasting in many conditions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put on a cupping glass is that you first put it empty, and then quickly suck up air, and apply it immediately, and move it equally, and do not stop doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and see the redness of the blood; then remove it and replace the cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are some who have tough flesh, and clear pores: so it is good to strike once only, and make wide wounds, and one deep mark; and suck lightly. 
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it is necessary to cut it twice: the first time to thin the path of the thick blood. 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to cut it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only make one incision. 
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we start again often; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the ends are such that the heart is pierced only slightly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who has few pores, that you moisten the place where the cupping glass will be with oil that is stimulating and dissolving: if it is summer, with violet oil or with sweet almond oil, or with pumpkin seed oil; and if it is winter, with cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluousness is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or oil of dill, and the like. 
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if he whom one is healing has tender flesh and large pores, it is not fitting to put any oil on, but one must wash him after the cupping with rose water, or cold water, or water of blackberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or other like. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise with water of myrtle, or of sumach, and of like things. 
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluousness should rise with old wine, or water of vinegar, or decoction of dill or chamomile, or other like; and it is not fitting to heal with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and he must not sleep after cupping, and it is fitting that he wash himself when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped.  
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard against it if the one who is healing is choleric, and if the wound is too raw and inflamed; then it is fitting that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in season, and similar things; and eat little, and roasted meat, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine half-old, which is between old and new, and eat little, and roasted meat, and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he gets cupped, he should drink more than he eats; and it is fitting to give some men sometimes ginger or musk before cupping, or after, to strengthen the principal limbs; and let the wound be subtle, but it is not fitting for those who are hot to drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Cupping glasses which are placed without wounding are those which are placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and gouty areas, and on the belly and buttocks and loins and hip, for these members do not suffer to be wounded, and we only do it to draw blood from one member to another, just as we place them on the breasts when a newborn is nursing; to remove viscosity which is in a member, such as we place cupping glasses on the belly and buttocks to reduce the member; and to remove pain, when there is obstruction or stone, then by its attractive virtue it removes the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place; and so it does when placed on the liver and thigh when there is retained windiness. These cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows: 
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should be two inches wide and half a palm long, and it has at its side near the middle a small hole, as for putting in a needle; and it should be of horn, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and it has in the middle a crossbar of horn or iron, to put a wick soaked in oil; and they are made in large and small sizes according to the illnesses and the age of those who use them; for cupping glasses for children are different from those for old people, and those for thin people are different from those for fat people. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should put this cupping glass on the limb as follows: take the wick soaked in wax or linen and put it through the crossbar that is in the middle of the cupping glass so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, with the two points resting on the hole that we have described, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes out, remove the cupping glass; and take the linen as before and start again often, if you need to.  
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass which is administered for the illness of pleurisy, to all acute [conditions], it has neither stalk nor hole, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and it is placed on the limb alone; and this is its form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping glasses are not administered except on limbs where one cannot apply cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare parts lacking flesh, such as breast or nose, and other similar ones; and the quality of the user is such that when you find cupping glasses that are in sweet water, clean and without pores, then take them; and put them one night in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then bleed a vein and apply a cupping glass, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and apply the cupping glasses; and when they are full and draw, if it is a place where one can apply a cupping glass, then apply it, for this is much better afterwards. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, if it lifts the place of ease, and then of sharp, very well, and then it breathes; and if its veins heal too much after the flesh of the wounds, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and put on top until the wound is tightened; and if the veins are multiplied, put ground vitriol, or alum, and similar things, until it is tightened; or you put half of peeled beans on the place, and leave them until they burn on the spot, this will stop now; and if you need more, take other wounds. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not want to take hold, rub the place with fresh blood, or you put a needle in it until the vein comes out, and then you put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn; and when you see that they are falling, powder a bit of aloes and salt crushed, or ash, they will fall now. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures 
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation. 
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the folly of men is cast upon this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them; and for this reason the science is strange in our land, for I have never found any good one; and I know nothing but through the science of the ancient books which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what it contains, and I have shortened it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are ministered, as I have done in these two chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say or prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding and dwells on truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art and teach it to others. 
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick person on one side and the other, if nothing else hinders him, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if his time is not very favorable, or too cold; and forbid cold meats, that is to say cold dishes, and game and goat meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading matter to the limb; if the sick person returns to his first government that he was used to. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourishes the patient with foods that promote thick nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and pies, and veal belly, eggs, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. 
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For thick nourishment recovers muscles and heals the break more quickly. 
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	Know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or soldered according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but have no fear, bind the broken bone with large splints that tighten and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; do not remove them quickly from his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with thick foods, as we have said.  
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways. 
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. 
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go awry, and others that sharpen, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack throughout. 
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own treatment and instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes back into place; and a fracture of the bone is recognized because the limb is twisted and clearly appears deformed when pressed with the hand; and when there is neither twisting nor pain when touched, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it may well have twisting or a crack or a small fracture.  
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not fitting that you move it with your hand, but apply the remedies that will come later, and then extract it now subtly. 
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that for a break that goes into the joint, and where the two parts are separated, it is fitting to now set them straight equally, just as abscesses should come alive; and if a hot abscess comes, leave it alone for a day, until the abscess is calmed; then set it equal to what you can lightly and gently move, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of one who has pieces; then extract it, as it will be fitting later. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the broken bone is in two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or one small limb at your hand or with two cords or one cord and at your hand; and set the limb according to its natural shape so that when the parts of the broken limb are loosened, you soften through all means the additions to their places, moving what you can, and be careful that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and adjust the two ends of the bone well according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right; if it sets straight beautifully, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who cause boils and contraction of the limb by their work, as we have seen many times. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, chastise the patient well so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor on turning, nor in any other way; and be sure to keep the limb so secure that it does not feel any pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not properly set, and you must put it in a different position so that it does not feel any pain; and be careful that it is set straight so that crookedness does not come when it is restored; and the quality of a broken limb is as I have told you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form. 
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and hands and similar ones; so it is fitting to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs; so it is fitting to wrap them with a wide and strong band, for the wide bands embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap; then tie around bandages lightly, three turns or four according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go above the break and restrain it less, so that the break then moves a little away from the break; and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the sound area, then take the other bandage, and turn around again over the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above; then put between the bandages strips of linen or cloths, until they are all equal, then tie everything over with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something soothing to the hot abscess, and that removes the swelling, and leave it like this for several days; then strain on your steles, and they should be half the width of a cane, cut straight, or from wood from which we make wedges, or from palm leaves, and they should be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the stele that we place on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as is appropriate for the limb, whether small or large; then strain on the steles as you did in the first hour, then tie a thread neatly above them, as in the first hour on the fracture; narrower beneath, less so above; and it is necessary that the threads are moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish men who make their bandages with twisted hempen cords, it is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not right that there be less than two finger spaces between each stele. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore from the heads of the bones after tightening in their healthy state, then put poultices of linen or shredded wool under them so they do not blanch. 
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will tell the cure afterward. 
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not behoove to pull out the bones of all fractured limbs on the first day. 
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it does not behoove to put in bones forcefully before 5 days or 7, or more according to your prudence of a hot abscess appearing; and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that stays at the sides of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of a plaster restoring the fracture in many positions, and the same for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three abareis and ladani and enule and asefetide and gum arabic and mugat, each ten drachmas; myrrh and aloes, each five drachmas; alechil nine drachmas; and make powder, and mix them with the white of an egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is a good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth much to many men. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is worth for torsion: take mugat and vismalve, each ten drachmas; myrrh and aloes, each nine drachmas; acaice six drachmas; bolic armenic ten drachmas; and grind well, and boil with vinegar or the white of an egg, and administer it.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and eases the pain arising, and makes use of the bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and moisten it in lye and boiled oil, and put on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for calming a hot abscess, and properly removes the pains. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make a plaster that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make a plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining inflammation of an abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part of each; and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is scalded, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and apply.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make a stronger plaster than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take marshmallow roots and flax seeds, plantain, melilot, and sanicle, and violet flowers and chamomile flowers, one part of each; and grind them, and mix with salt water or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard. 
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that one should put on a broken limb, to restore it, dry things somewhat hot, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and goat hairs cut off, or bird feathers, and mallow, and grind them equally, and make a plaster and bind it. 
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then unbind it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; if not, do not unbind it for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or swelling, then hurry and unbind it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry wool on it, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it for a night, as long as you are sure of a hot abscess; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then start the binding again subtly, and a little plaster, and do not pull it too tightly as before; and be subtle until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess boils and reddens and there is pain and swelling, you have removed all of it, and you need to apply plaster and a bandage, if it recurs, as you did first equally. 
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not untie it except after III days or IV or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what you see, as long as the fracture heals, and the adjustment of the flesh above approaches; then restrain it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I said before; and if you see the place dry more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; therefore, when you untie it, apply a cloth soaked in warm water, every time, and leave a small opening at the joint; by this work, nourishment then comes to the limb, and quickly amends what the foolish mire has done, which twisted the limb: this is bad, and these are perilous works, and I do not see anything else but to leave it and work it straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking 
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the bone down to the syfac which is below the bone, as a hatchet or ax does; and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure". 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small. 
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or neck of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things. 
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches up to the membrane that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is large or small. 
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound is rejoined to the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and it makes the piece of bone go in, and the veins are cut as the blacksmiths do when they strike on the cauldrons; if the stone goes in. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have soft or wet bones, such as the head of a child; and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are detached, like chips; and I will speak about them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all kinds of fractures by the retraction on them, and the inquisition of the tendons, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them. 
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	Similar hairiness is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs gently upon it, if it appears black fractured. 
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, take care of the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and pallor, and fever with chills, and the like coming out forcefully and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt. 
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a dangerous accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.  
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the least that you can. 
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone becomes corrupted, and accidents come as we have said. 
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is fitting that you split the fractured part thus: and take the head of the patient securely, and uncover upon the bone in all the ways that you can, and upon the shape of the wound more often than you can; and if discharge of blood comes to discover the bone, or an abscess forms, aid it as is necessary, and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess that has formed is appeased, and you are assured of the discharge of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method if is that you cut at a narrow cutting in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I put another cutting larger than the first. 
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of different sized incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and are made of tempered iron; and in work lightly, so that you do not dull the point. 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus administering incisions with trepans, not so much that they do not pierce beyond the bone where you are testing, and it must have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the kind of bone, so that you have trepans for all kinds of bones; and this is the form of the three manners of trepans: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the trepan on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know the bone is pierced; then place the trepan elsewhere a bit after, and so do all around, then cut with a saw the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pliers; and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the dura mater. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, it is fitting that you leave the instrument which remains attached to the bone with all other instruments similar to a chisel, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other chisel; and if there remain any small bones or scales, remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is that which Galien says, which is safer; and he praises it very highly, and this is his word. 
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is fitting first that you uncover a part of the bone where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lentil-shaped chisel, of which this is the form:  
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is sharpened on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet upon it, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth which is underneath; if it is torn by the bone, remove the bone lightly, for one can remove it well without harm and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you should scrape away that roughness and remove the scales with a delicate razor, of which you should have various sizes, in order to administer the most suitable one for each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture. 
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you begin with large razors, and afterwards use smaller ones, and do not cease doing so until it is well. 
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is fitting that you administer care according to its direction; and this is something not easily answered by one who has put his study into this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the syfac is uncovered, then you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound; then take another cloth doubled into two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and lay it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the syfac, then administer a bandage over it, and do not tighten it excessively only enough to hold the wound; and leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation of the abscess has subsided, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily root, vetch flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder of these things, and sprinkle it on the wound, and administer now cleansing medicines without any biting sensation; and ensure that the wound is now clean, that you do not leave any ointment there, nor allow pus to accumulate, for when pus gathers upon the surface of the brain, it will corrode and constrict, and cause the patient great harm; for when one puts something irritating on the syfac, it will sting above it.  
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt. 
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness does not come except for the medicine that has been placed on it, so that it may have its effect, then it is fitting that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in glue one cloth and put it on the affected area; then cure it in the manner of cures as it is fitting until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts of the nose are rarely broken, or one by itself, for they are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists, and then heals.  
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is fitting that you put your little finger or thumb on the nose, and place the break inside your index finger, and at the purse by pressing, until the nose returns according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot return to its place, then you must place it equal to the head of a nail, a large point. 
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, you must do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscesses that have formed are calmed, then bind at the head of the knee, bandages of linen. 
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind one to the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.  
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the bandages in butter and change them each day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary for them to be softened in a confection of yolk of egg, and mill powder; then leave the bandage on as long as the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put goose feathers in place of bandages, and if it comes loose, wrap it again, and hold the break together, and let the patient breathe among them; do what you see. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if boils come to the nose while you are working on it, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or a poppy seed poultice. 
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if boils do not come, put a plaster made of sesame flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on light bandages, and do not tie the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small and it is broken in small pieces, extract it with appropriate instruments for this, then sew up the incision and treat it with things that promote healing and bonding, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with bandages, and put canes of flax, until it heals. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the breaking of the jawbone 
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken below, and there is no wound showing, and the break is below only, and is not broken in two, but forced inward, then the expert can easily recognize it. 
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is fitting, if the break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left side of the jawbone, put your index finger of the right hand in and push the break inward slightly, and fix it with the other hand by pushing outward, and make it equal. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is in two parts, it is fitting that you administer extension in two parts, so that it is equal. 
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if loosening of the teeth occurs, or breakage, tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put cerate on the broken jawbone, and put two cloths over it; and put a large well-made star, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, over the cloths, and tie it up at the temples as you are able, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, untie it on the third day and then put back into place what has changed; and apply a plaster made from powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour after you have removed the cerate; and put light linen over the plaster. And if the plasters dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in three weeks. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, treat them as we have said many times. 
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, see that no piece of bone is removed; use subtle instruments suitable for this. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to your need.  
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, if the wound is large, apply dressings suitable for it to promote flesh until it is healed. 
de la forcele	Of a forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks several times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound. 
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the forceps is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the fracture equal to your needs, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor defect. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need; stretch and lift the force, and pull the sphere with your hand so that you set the fracture evenly as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the bone out further because it comes in straight, it is fitting that the patient lie often on his back, and put under the shoulder a medium pillow, and push the ministers the shoulder down until the bone of the humerus is raised. 
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then straighten the fracture according to your skill, and if you find it shattered, it is fitting that you split it up; and draw the pieces lightly together, and if the bone cannot join for any pressure, apply one of the incisors that you have; but place under the humerus this instrument to keep it in place. 
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp, and it should be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, soak a cloth in rose oil and assafetida and wine, and apply it. 
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The setting of a bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster of mill flour and egg yolk, and put light wadding on top, and put a splint under the armpit, if you need it; then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put the cloth double on the wadding and the plaster; then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage up onto the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the injured armpit; and loosen it from each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly, and you see clearly that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then leave it for a day, and when the bandages slacken, tighten them again; and let the patient lie on his back, and put under his armpit a small pillow when he sleeps to raise the shoulder high up; this will lighten the fracture from the weight of the shoulder, or you tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, for twenty days; then start the plaster again, if you see that he needs it, and remove it and leave him like that, until he is restored; and it is restored at most in twenty-eight days, and less in some men.  
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder 
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or is out of place by a great distance, and it is not known except by touch; if you set it according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in all ways as you can; then put on the place powder from a mill with plenty of egg white and light bandages, and put a double cloth on top; then put a wide and delicate splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if below the splint there are hairs anywhere on the shoulder, use those hairs for bandages of flax so that the splint lies evenly; and then bind it all with a large bandage firmly so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the binding every day; and every time it loosens, bind it again, and set the splint straight if it is out of place, and lay the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is reached, unbind it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that is put back lightly.  
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes forward and not below the heart, then lift it up and the bone-setter should do what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle to soothe the abscess with heat. 
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot 
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is rarely broken in the middle, but it does happen sometimes; but it often breaks at the ankle. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks downwards, and the patient experiences great pain, shortness of breath, and vomiting, and sometimes the hair stands on end in the broken bone, and they know very well that it is broken. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back and puts a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders and assembles the ribs of the two sides with their hands, and subtly puts them equal in all the ways they can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plasters and bandages over the broken bone with a subtle plaster of salt or other light herb, and wrap it in a cloth and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage round the back and tighten it evenly, and check every hour if the bandage is loose, and if it is, tighten it; and if it is necessary to untie it due to corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, remove the plaster, and treat what has come about in a manner of cures; then apply the plaster and untie it when it is healed.  
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs 
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in their thickness behind the back, and mainly inside, and they only break because they are slippery; and one feels it well upon inquiry.  
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the break straight, as it should be. 
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster and remove it with a splint, if you need to. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the broken rib is sloping inward, the patient feels great pain and shortness of breath, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and the patient coughs up blood tinged with pus, and vomits a lot of blood, and this is a serious ailment, and the ancients have said it is a grave affliction. 
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is fitting to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the break outward. 
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, so that hot abscesses do not come, if they have not already come. 
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, we heal it. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we place cupping glasses on the spot to suck out humors, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass may draw superfluities to the spot because of weakness. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that we should cover the spot with wool moistened in hot oil, and place bandages between the ribs to make the binding even, then it is treated with a poultice of pleurisy root, meat, and medicine. 
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone pointing through the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument under it to guard the nerve; and then one should carve the bone, and draw lightly on it, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put it on cloths softened in rose oil, and place them on the spot; and care for it as long as is necessary for the abscess, and let it lie often on the side where it should be, until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	of a broken neck 
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it happens that it rains; and also in the spine of the back. 
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortally wounded in several ways, and if he moves them and feels well when they are stretched and pricked, know that the juncture of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if care is given to him.  
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, see if its feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in the hands are softened, and on the back there comes flatulence and excretion without volition; and when one has turned it on its stomach, there comes excretion without volition. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is turned on his back and wants to rise, he cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal; if one does not labor in its cure. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, the thing is lighter.  
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is such that you consider whether there is a hot abscess; if so, put rose oil or oil of egg yolk on the spine until it is soothed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is healed.  
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover it on the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment containing charcoal, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your left hand in your pocket, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the splint on top, if you need them; then remove it, and if there are broken bones, do as above, and remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the hip bone  
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there would only be a slight decrease in stature; and after a long time, and leaning to one side, pain comes to the patient at the location, and tenderness, and swelling where the break is. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are above the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is in the head only, then make that fracture equal, as long as it is in its natural shape. 
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach, as long as the restoration of that fracture appears to you. 
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it equal, put a plaster on it, then put a splint of wood or horn on top, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the area below the ribs, as long as the ligament is equal. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess should come, do not touch it until the abscess is soothed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that is the way.  
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	from the breaking of the shoulder 
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of two methods: one of which is that you take a splint of medium thickness, according to this form: 
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with two cords and lift them up, and lay the patient down on a seat; then place the splinted arm broken upon the splint so that it reaches the armpit, and make a curve in the splint, then lift it up onto some heavy object or have assistants stretch it out downwards; then put your hands on the break, aligning it with both hands together, until the break returns as it should. 
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you place the patient on his mattress and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one hold what is above the break with his hands, and the other hold below at all of the limb, and each stretch in his own direction.  
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their respective roles. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is fitting that you place one ligature midway below the armpit, and the other toward the elbow, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is toward the elbow, it is fitting to put the ligature gently, without effort, as long as the fracture is aligned on the side and on the elbow; then set the fracture evenly, as it should be, and extract it, if no abscess arises. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess arises, do not extract it for seven days, and put moistened linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil on it until the abscess is calmed; then extract it, and the manner of extracting it is that you place a plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; and put on the sheet, and extract upwards on the shoulder support, and on the arm so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints and place a larger and stronger splint on the fracture than the others, and have two finger widths of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three finger widths on each side; then strain upwards on the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less remotely. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seating of the splints and the constriction as we have said in the hour that you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heat, then leave it bound until the seventh day as we have said; then look at the bandage every three days, so that itching does not swell or come to the place where the constrictions cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.  
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you hold it as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents comes, do not untie it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of equal wool, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or is not loosened by the ties; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, give him the meat as we have previously said, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be large. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be held for forty days in all; and then he must untie them and administer baths and ointments to heal the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and congested, it will remain loosened for I day or II months. 
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm 
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "focills," of which one is small, and is the one that goes into the pouch; and the other is large, and is the one that is below, towards the little finger; by chance it breaks the large focus alone, or the small one, and by chance both together. 
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small focills are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing, and more grievous than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small focus alone that is broken, then you must lightly extend it and put it equal. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, then it is necessary to restrain more strongly; and extend it upon a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher up so that the patient does not suffer any hardship; then extend the minister's arm below his hand, or at the bandage, and another minister above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the sights equal, according to its best shape. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is none detached that you can grasp with the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision over the bone, as we have said before. 
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; then take the care.  
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration boils appear, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and bind it subtly on top until the boils subside. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cerote and apply a plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg yolk, then place the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger now and a bit wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or two; and pull more above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is pulled be linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And watch over the limb and the ligament after some days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb with hot water, until the itching is soothed; and let the limb not be tightly bound. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are loosened, and similar things, so address it. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care so that nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you loosen it a bit and leave it like that for some days, until nourishment goes to it, and then remove it. 
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, do not unbind him until 20 days.  
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Where there is a sprain, then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and guard against movement and swaying, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand 
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two there occur few fractures, and it comes but more often a pain. 
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or pained, it behooves that the patient sit crosswise, and sit straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on a cloth stretched out, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to the pointers, as long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in one sheet of linen. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the pardedens around the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to squeeze it at his fractured plant; then bind it with a long bandage, and let the star be as large as the palm of the hand, and pull it out, as it should be. 
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the defuer, it is fitting that you put a star above and another below on the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then bind it tight around the hand and seal the bond between the two. 
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two fingers, if it is the thumb, put it equal, as it should be; and pull it out with the plant, and if you see fit, put a small straight star to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index finger or one of the others, put it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that is next to it; or bind them all in an I shape, so that they do not move, or put a star on it, as on the thumb; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of a hot abscess, and help those who come to you, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh 
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one sees it well when it turns in front and behind; and its restoration is done by tying one ligature above the break and another below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends their ligature to their respective side equally; and this is when the break is between the bones. 
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, one of the ligatures should be towards the buttock, and the other ligatures below the break. 
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then the ligatures should be placed near the knee, and the extension below; then set the bones equal with both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses appear anywhere. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the ligature is made in this manner. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap on the fracture I bandage hard doubled in II or III, and leave the superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put I long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee underneath, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then place on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then apply the eighth place between the leg and the thigh of cloths soft to make equal the tightness, then begin to tie three twists or four on the fracture; and when going further above the fracture, the tighter it becomes; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and tie III splints that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, as far as you come to the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus until there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any other resemblance.  
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, so that the limb is dislocated, and straightened as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, then you must extract them, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut into the place and pull with force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken so that one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in this restoration thus made does not make the patient lame. 
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 40 days or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions. 
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the path from the knee 
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the path from the knee there are few breaks, but it bends many times.  
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is only a crack or a hole, and occurs in any wound, and without a wound, then it is good. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its due place, as much as it can be assembled and moved; then apply a plaster, and put a round splint on top, if you need it, and remove it as necessary, then observe all the provisions we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses, cautery, and other similar things; so apply to each accident what is fitting until it is healed. 
de la brisure de la jambe	of a broken leg  
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called by right name "tibia," and the other is called "fibula"; and all other fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, equally, and the work is altogether like. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn them forward. 
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain and it is seen well; and turn it down below.  
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension and set it equal, and tie the splints equally; but however, if the break is bad and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two bandages of willow wood that are long enough to cover the leg from one side to the other, and let them be twice as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap them around with two bandages above and below, and tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot lean to the right or left, and thus it is well; and no one should apply any splints along the length of the leg, and if they are made of wood, and put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done in the fracture or where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; then care for it until it is healed. 
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of bones of the foot 
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there does not come a fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes come to fracture and it is necessary to know and there are not many situations. 
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are fractured, and you see these bones rise on top of each other, have the patient put their foot on the ground as if they wanted to walk, and then place your foot upon theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply a plaster and bandages over it, and place beneath the sole of the foot a small board with two fingers thick, and then straighten the foot carefully so that when you have wrapped it in cloths and other things which you need. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal whether they are broken or dislocated. 
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, if you restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and it should be a finger wider, then put under the foot that table which I have said, and bind it carefully; and if there are two or three, or more, bones broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table underneath the foot; and let it be placed on the top of the table above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well. 
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, just as we have said; and help each accident as it should be done. 
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the wrist  
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline her to the back part, and have her held from behind; then fill the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as I stick; then unbend the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then the cotton will jump, as much as it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the stick; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for VII days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of kid, and tie a cane to the hole, and push the whole bladder into the nature; then blow into the cane gently, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the fracture; then fill with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the arm of a man or woman is broken, if it is set as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and experience into this, and understand my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture signifies in several positions the right way of restoration: so understand then. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will quickly heal. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound 
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It behooves one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, as in the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to have it healed now, so that the healings that we have spoken of testify to this.  
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you have no other option, then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, so long as pus does not come. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus does come, then leave the restoration until a new day, until the pus is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause bad accidents. 
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the heart uncovered, then it is fitting that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with slight extension. 
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear to you to put it equal with your hands, then have this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary for the user that he engrave three or four, according to what he may need in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and have a large hole so that it does not bend at compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front and thick from the middle forward like this: 
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called “palainche,” for which reason the curved head must be placed upon the head of the exposed bone; and the end at once, as much as it returns, and be equalized one against the other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone so that the instruments have power. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then cut with an instrument suitable for this, either an incisor or a saw, at your power; then scrape away what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters. 
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you have set it back in place, then moisten the bandage with black stiptic wine and apply it cleanly; and if it is summer, do not put any cerate or anything else on the wound where there is oil, lest it cause decay and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many a foolish barber has done this and has caused death or corruption upon the patient at times; and let the ligatures be looser and softer than for other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that evil accidents may come as we have said, and you find pain in the place, it is not right to put on splints; but wrap tightly around, instead of splints, hard bandages, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to heal, remove what you have put on it altogether and apply healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is joined and healed. 
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the wound drains slightly downwards. 
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day passes and it cannot heal but the wound opens again, know that there are small bone fragments, for which reason you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose fragments that cause the pain. 
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the site, or some other manner of corruption, it is fitting that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter before this one. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it, for often death comes, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	burns that come from the solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sorry sight to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions. 
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed then if the swelling is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with oil; and put them on the swelling in compresses, and bind it well, and do not untie it for three days; and then untie it, and begin another, until the swelling is removed; or you bind it on a piece of lead well made; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it above, and remove the superfluity that appears; or you shave it with any razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after healing 
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and thin afterward, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and nourishment could not come to the limb; or because of a multitude of movements; or because of too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, therefore he is weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, until the blood is multiplied in him; and give him baths, and give him joy and leisure; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws nourishment to it, and warm it often with hot water, until nourishment reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.  
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb twisted after the health 
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the form of the limb is unsightly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, for many foolish men have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the nodules and the torture are fresh, it is fitting that they be softened with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, such as diachylon well made, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with grease of goose or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or take fat figs, and crush them with bran of wheat, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling. 
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation removed by continual and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be administered to the limb every hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut up to the bone, with a subtle incisor lightly; and put caution and study into the treatment. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and injury. 
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When a dislocation comes to someone, if it must now be brought back without delay. 
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the flesh swells, and by chance if one puts it back in place; therefore, one must not move it when it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient well then let him be, until the abscess has been quieted; then raise the limb with sharp heat and oil, then soften it lightly, and treat each limb as the treatment will come to its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head down to the feet. 
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It can happen that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little loosened from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the feet, and spill the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech. 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it returns by itself through several arrangements. 
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it quickly and do not delay; and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put their thumbs into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of both sides; and the other hand should be free, to place equally; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he looks at the wound as evenly as possible, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if resetting it is difficult, even when the two jawbones are together, apply a mixture of hot water and oil, until they soften slightly; do not hesitate to reset it, as we have said. 
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, put soft cloths soaked in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind them with linen; let the patient sleep on his back, with his head resting between two cushions so that he does not move it either to the right or left, nor strain to chew but take light food, as long as the pains are gone and the jawbones are joined; then eat whatever he wants lightly, and do not bother to open his mouth wide for eating and drinking, as long as the mandible is well joined and healed.  
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps loosening of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of bile. 
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times death comes to those to whom it happens, in nine days. 
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot dislocate both sides within the continuation of it and the foot, and it is dislocated sometimes at the beginning, and one feels it well. 
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; and then presses the place formed with your palm, and it will return; then put plaster on it and bandage it, and remove it; and the head which is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates sometimes, then you must reset it in its place, as we have said; then put plaster on it and bandage it, and remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it is detached from its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder 
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the axle below; and the second is at the part of the buttock; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the axle, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it is quickly hastened; in those who have enough flesh, it is hard to hasten, and it returns with difficulty. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.  
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment. 
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that a shoulder is dislocated when it is lowered toward the axle, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axle at the touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its nest, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upward, unless it is hidden, because you will find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not very difficult to reset, when it is new, or when the infant is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upward, then place his fingers below the axle, and lift the joint forcefully upward into its place; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward, then puts it below; it will come quickly. 
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterwards, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and let him be given a softening and soothing dressing, such as a decoction of alt, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be administered; then let the patient be laid on his back, and put under the armpit a cloth of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the bed under the heel of the patient, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down; this shoulder will return now, and if you see that you reset according to this manner: and it is necessary that you have a man present who is larger than the patient; and he be straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, you can put something heavy on them, and the dislocation will return immediately. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting is also done in another way: and it is one puts a long burning ember into the earth, whose head should be as round as a pestle, and not too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but let him have cloths soft above, and the patient shall be lying along the length of the wood; then his hand is stretched out on the other side straight, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not wish to return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take an ember of two arms in length and four fingers wide, which has a round head to enter perfectly under the armpit according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie cloths on the head of the wood below so that the wood does not burn the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm along the wood, and tie the shoulder onto the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on the rung of a wide ladder, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.  
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever way it may be, it behoves you to put under the armpit a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and yolk of egg, upon all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the armpit carefully, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus. 
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it behoves him to rest a little, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then rest more after 5 days or 7, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for another reason, it behoves you to administer cauteries to 3 holes, as it is laid down in the chapter on cauteries.  
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it comes undone after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place. 
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation which is near the buttock and the breasts or behind, is done by thrusting and extending the arms, and administering it elsewhere; and cure as long as he is healthy. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb, and slowness in movement, then have the patient bathe many times until that stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original nature. 
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation from the rib
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the rib is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated on all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not fixed, for one can see it well and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick knife with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as if abscesses were to come, for if abscesses were to come, it would be harmful to return it; and by chance it cannot be returned at all, even when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such, when it can be returned as it is, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arms should be spread, and the hands turned according to the knife around, above and below, and push the joint at its ends together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and presses on the root of the palm or the costal which has been dislocated. 
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and let the minister who extends the arm, hold it, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it; and when the minister reaches the joint, apply oil to the joint to soften it, then push the joint straight, until it returns to its place; and when it is in its place, put dry plaster on it with egg white, bind it tightly, and hang the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it for several days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not quite right, start the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days, until it is firmly in place; then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or you put a greasy sheep's fleece on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then bone-set it, and let him enter a bath; and when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then put the fleece back on, and then enter a bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see, then put moist, heated cow dung with butter on it, and strain it on; it will return to its position. 
li dislocation de la main	Hand dislocation 
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is easy, more so than the other joints. Nonetheless, it should be hastily reset in the same hour that it is dislocated, even if the flesh is swollen or an abscess appears hot. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the repositioning is such that you place the affected hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at him to make it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes as much as it returns Wholeway. It is necessary that you look whether it is well in place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and the minister puts his hand on that appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good. If not, he strains soothing plasters for abscesses socks and leaves it thus without restarting. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it in place after several days, the joint remains crooked; and do not harm the patient further than that as long as the hand is weak, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other remedy than to extract by cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it like that. 
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some pain, apply hot water and rub it until it is healed. 
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of fingers 
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns, then support the head of the finger and bend it toward the part where it is separated; and leave it for two days, and then put it straight that day; and bind it at night, as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and rebind it at night; and do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in another place.  
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	about the loosening of the shoulder blade from the back 
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade from the back or the neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient. 
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the limbs jump forcefully without volition, and he cannot hold them, and often some members are softened, either both thighs or both arms or one. And often the shoulder blade moves in four parts; the one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez"; the cure is that you consider if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there is no cure or healing altogether. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, they say ancient manners of cures in many words, which are not very profitable overall; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the breast beforehand, none has neither sense nor feeling; and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure except that properly which comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have a strain below him so that he does not get hurt; then put a coal at the head into the ground, and the other at the feet, and tie a string under the buttocks of the sick person, and the other at the haunches, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two coals; and they are well closed, the coal as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine into the ground, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms long and put the end under the armpit, and have the patient lie on his side, and push the head of the board under the armpit, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the patient place his feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until it returns to its place; and if you see it, do it with a tourniquet that twists at hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And have two tinders placed at the head of the patient one arm's length apart and two others towards the feet; and between each tinder, above and below, leave a palm's length of space; and in each tinder make one hole where the tourniquet passes, and firmly set the tinders in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of tinders place a turning tinder from which the linen turns; and have two small tinders a palm long on the two turners to turn the tourniquet; then tie the linen among the axles to the tourniquet towards the head, and the other linen towards the feet to the other tourniquet; and let each of the assistants turn his tourniquet along the entire length of the linen, and the master place the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on top with plenty of egg, then the bandages, and then the splint from a tablet three finger-lengths long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is healthy; then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of healing, you must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned before; and sometimes administer a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes on the back spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; but it is the bone that appears, for which one should not presume at all: by chance death would come. 
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip dislocations 
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come loose through dislocations alone, and not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind; and more often inside than otherwise, and rarely dislocated in front and behind. 
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	The knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee; and there is swelling behind which feels like a hot abscess because the head of the thigh comes there.  
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one in whom it goes outwards is that this condition is the opposite of those in front. 
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one in whom it occurs in front are that their leg is well aligned according to its structure; however, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if you try to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and their groin swells, and when they walk, they pass on their heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has it behind are that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs. 
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this kind of dislocation is such that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its placement, then there is no cure; and it is not fitting that he should have presumption. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for him whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, and stretch it in and out, and move it to right and left; by chance it will return, and does not need another cure. 
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, it is fitting that you prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a ligature which is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand upon it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it tightly with a strong ligature on the thigh; and another holds the head of the ligature; and they extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.  
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good. 
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must apply treatment according to its resemblance. When the dislocation is in the hip, you should place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage on the root of the thigh, and the place below the angle, then extend the bandage upward toward the angle and toward the groin; then have another assistant hold the patient's arms, and embrace the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend it outward in a straight form; it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.  
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage above on the two heels, and on the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fists more than the others; then hang him by the head from a beam, and let him be suspended so that his arms are outstretched two arm's lengths from the ground; then command one assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging with the patient embrace the thigh straight, for the joint will now return quickly. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the leg, have the patient lie down as we said for the one who has gout, and bind a bandage properly on the diseased leg and on the foot as well; then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then place one ember between the thighs of the patient so that it forms a triangle; and place cloths dampened with water around it so it doesn't burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and have the one who is looking hold the dislocation evenly with his hand. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on a table and press as we said for gout, and have the patient lie down on their healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let the one who is looking place his pain on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the knee. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is backward, it is not right to extend the patient downward, nor to raise him up on the ground, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on both hips; and he should be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and you must press on the joint at the table; and it will be right when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, and put plaster on it, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and he rests for three days or four, then unbind him, and put plaster on it; and if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind him, and let him walk well, as long as the limb is comfortable. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee 
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not straighten at his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you have the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee so they form a right angle; and another minister extends his foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at his thigh easily; and put the plaster on, and allow the leg to be aired at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then unbind it; and let the patient not bother walking, as long as the limb is comfortable. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all present, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed. 
de la dislocation dou talon	of dislocation of the heel 
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.  
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tense in front of the part where it is dislocated; the resetting is gentle, and one must gently extend it with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.  
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you must have the patient sit straight, and hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle; then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot up nicely; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a strong stake firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around it so that it does not hurt the patient; then hold the thigh with one assistant, and another assistant extend the foot with their hands or with a rope, which they tie around the ankle; then both assistants extend evenly, and the stake should be firmly between the patient's thighs to hold them down when extending; then place your hands equally on the dislocation, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.  
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is set right, put the plaster and bandages on top, and bind them tight, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch over the nerves which are above the ankle behind so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two days or three, and if the bandage loosens, tighten it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess should come, it is fitting that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed. 
des dois	of the two 
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, they must be nicely extended without exertion, and this is an easy thing.  
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on a level place or on a table straight up, and put your foot on what appears of these joints, then press your foot firmly until it returns; and when it is equalized, and nothing appears, put under the sole of the foot a table with two legs, then bind it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and make him rest, as long as he is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together 
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and you want to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, do not be bold; and use at the beginning soothing things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess may come alive; and when the limb is in its place, then administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and cure the wound as it is necessary, with drying ointments; and if there is a break with the dislocation, and small bones are broken off, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body. 
Amen	So be it
