O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end by its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so it is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of its power except small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came error and vanity, and understanding is closed off, and knowledge is driven away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. 
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will bring together the shapes of the cautery irons and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for anyone who undertakes this to study the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the arrangement of the limbs and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and the movement of the veins moving and resting, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is much, and with practice is little; 
et meismement en l’art de main.	and likewise in the art of the hand.  
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, if he takes care that he does not fall into error and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	As I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science abandon themselves to their lack of knowledge and experience. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish barber who cut an abscess of scrofula or a boil on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck; 
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for which so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands. 
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another barber who treated a stone of a man in pain, and the stone was large;  
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another barber who took in care the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; 
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the barber, full of ignorance, pulled out the fracture on top of the wound with strong force, and did not leave to the wound any dressing, and he left it thus in the end;  
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded him not to unwrap it; 
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and delay so that the leg was all swollen and the foot and came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hastened to come untie the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I loosened it, it was so easy and he felt no pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed or limb, and I could not heal it;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to go through the limb until the limb was completely lost. 
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another marvel which drained the inflamed abscess, and then it became swollen through the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not right to touch it with iron unless it is in a part where one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: 
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	namely, work where there is danger in several positions; 
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.  
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For which it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you. 
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take up your instruments in good conscience, and treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised. 
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave curable diseases without delay.  
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your instruments from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen said in some of his admonishments: 
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	“Do not undertake a bad illness unless you are called by a wise master. 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of cauteries of medicinal waters, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; 
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of instruments, and the fastenings of a cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; 
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapter is arranged and the forms of instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;  
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is arranged from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments. 
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest speech and subtlest science and secret answers; 
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and many wise men spoke of this, and agreed on it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I am content with few of their words, for I fear length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, except two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know hot complexions without matter, and dry complexions without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, they divided and said that the cautery is of great help; 
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And the others said the opposite: 
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That the cautery is only worthwhile for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.  
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat nor dryness. 
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And those who said otherwise stated that the cautery is of great help for hot and dry illnesses that arise in the bodies of men. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in every way, do not interfere unless those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We do not fear other complexions, even cold and wet diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mire gathered together and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that a fire cautery together with fire is of greater secrecy in cures and of greater benefit than a medicinal burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it so happens.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning remedies come from one member to another in banishing, and they bring to the member diseases of grievous healing; 
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance kill the sick person. 
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its heat and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; 
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me that I withhold from you the secret which is entrusted to fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; 
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Or receive it in your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be done, and they emerged entreating.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that a cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful things arising are lowered by the help of the cautery.  
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And likewise, if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm comes to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For a disease that is healed by a cautery does not recur. 
et il le dient ensi;	And they say it thus.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not so as they think, because cauteries are only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and are worth more than medicine for its quick effectiveness, and for the virtue of its work and power. 
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the illness comes at times according to the patient's complexion, the location of the illness, and its virtue. 
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And if the superfluous humors are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, then cauteries should be administered in the place where there is an excess of superfluities and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, so that the pain does not return. 
mais ce avient poc.	But this rarely happens. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is this: 
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauteries are effective after other medicines, but their understanding is false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer remedies for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish minds.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its highness of substance; 
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the burns from a cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some men; 
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they said.  
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly. 
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if you heat it too much;  
si font au feu;	it melts in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there are enough obstacles. 
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use the fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two that are made because of an illness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can bear.  
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the head of the patient fall back. 
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs; 
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; 
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds afterward cauterize with the iron called “olivare,” which has this shape: 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move downward while squeezing your hand slowly and turning it; 
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand gently, and look at the spot again to see if the bone shows a little; 
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you don't see it, begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; 
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	then take a small piece of thread and put it in soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; 
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then place it on cotton softened in butter; 
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it there until the burn is gone. 
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrapharmacon" until it is healed.  
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And as the ancients said, the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; 
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore it must be helped to close.  
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one should leave the cautery on until a part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that the cautery should be left on so long and pressed so hard that it ablates bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their spindles so that the humors are quickly expelled.  
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And the wound should be left open for a long time; 
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Then it should be cleaned and soldered.  
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two ways of cautery do not seem good to me in every respect except in some men who have a way of fearing
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and move I believe that I should leave it; 
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by the continuous humors of nature, as we witness in other members; 
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and likewise when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healthy and moderate for me, and from this I work in consequence a safe healing. 
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, so should the patient use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and purging of the head and oils and plasters; 
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does the cautery as we have said before, and it is not worth it. 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then the cauterizer underneath that cauterizer makes a spot as we have said above. 
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterward make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery where it is called "vessels"; 
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and these are the places where one puts cupping glasses;  
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and align your hand so that you do not see down to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; 
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is fitting that the cauteries of the horns be more delicate than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness is extended to the eye, and the humors are purged by purifying medicines, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit: 
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then he makes cauteries according to two manners, namely of sharp iron and fire. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauteries of sharp iron are such that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into two pieces as the size of the bone, and then make a temple where the pain is in two ways so that you can place the piece of alum beneath the skin; 
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it will be placed, bind it well and leave it thus for twelve hours;  
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then unbind it and apply a piece of garlic over it, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; 
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put linen soaked in butter on top as much as possible until it dries.  
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure with ointment until it is healed; 
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see, do this with some burning medicines that I have written or else treat of burning medicines.  
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a beak with a curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance. 
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned. 
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood flows.  
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards put cotton in a bundle, and put it on the spot for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put cotton softened in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.  
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "culter," at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not old. 
de emigraine	From migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white. 
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And then draw a line half a finger long on the painful spot, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and do not go as far as the bone.  
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And be careful of the jawbone which moves when one chews, and do not pay attention to the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the flowing of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear, both to him who does it and to the one who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced. 
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work halfway; 
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you its location in this book. 
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; 
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, along with a cautery that has two knives; 
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has worked on it with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pointing to all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is held on both sides, and you remove a bit from its root since you have marked the location for incision; 
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and put 10 points around each ear; 
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards treat the place until it is healed. 
de la torture de la bouche	From the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torment that should be treated with fire cautery is only of those that move by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease. 
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cautery on things that resemble those coming from dryness and spasm of nerves.  
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this kind of torment that moves from phlegm by hydrates and purges from the head and gargling, and it is useful, then it is fitting that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a fire point by the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips. 
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery point on the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery upon it until half of the core is burned. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery: 
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the knife that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be a little larger. 
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cured the place as I have said before, until it is healed.  
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then make him four cauteries: 
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one on the back of the head, and one on the place that is called “vessels” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach. 
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And let it be treated as we have said before. 
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, give the patient large herbs and purifying pills for the brain; 
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	Then after you have raised the head of the patient, and place mustard plaster on the back of his head as is written in the treatise on plasters; 
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the manner of the cautery: 
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do as I have said. 
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healed thus, it is good; 
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not, make him three cauteries starting from the top of his head and descending to his neck, with a space of two finger-widths between each cautery. 
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat it as the others, and if you see that a boil has developed and the patient is suffering, make him one cautery in the middle; 
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and heal it as long as it is healed; 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cautery be called "olivary," as I have said before. 
de la froidor dou chief	From the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is fitting that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have said before; 
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after you shave the head of the patient, then apply the cautery around the head and on each horn, and the back and three on the spine of the neck; 
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; 
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it until the innermost part burns, and lift your hand; 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure as long as it is healed, and let the cautery be called "olivary" as we have said before. 
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those who are suffering from excessive hair growth should only use the cautery if they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on when the patient is large and suffers from a lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, have him do gargles and chew food that modifies the brain often with good meats; 
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	Afterwards he raises the head in the middle, and he applies the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; 
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffering, he applies cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, he shall make a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or moist humors corrupted and thick phlegm, then the cautery of iron cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then let him drink things by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After raising the head of the patient; 
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	then make a well-made linen tourniquet, also like a circle, and place it around the head;  
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and have the patient lie down with arms crossed, and be well held on all sides; 
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After presenting the linen, and apply poultices of old butterbur; 
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it gently over fire so that the patient can bear it; 
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After emptying the circle inside, immerse the head, and let it cool;  
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once a week with another good regimen until they are healed. 
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it being cauterized, making several punctures with all of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery softens the brain properly; 
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then put softened cotton in butter and jelly fat. 
de l’awe des eulz	from the eyes of the arrows
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he commands him to put back his head, and he makes a cautery immerse the head, and he makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is at both, or one if the descent is in one; 
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cauterize all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; 
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And guard against blood loss; and if you see too much blood coming out, then stanch it as best you can. 
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how to stretch it. 
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never make a cautery or burn below the two bones behind.  
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are upon the veins, or near the arteries which are in appearance on the outside of the head; 
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is a cold, phlegmatic superfluous matter, then do the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter descending towards the eyes: 
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or burns below the two bones. 
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if there is further need, let the cautery burn above the eyebrow with all the small cautery. 
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	tears of the body flow within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you give him medicine according to what we have said in the division, and he does not profit, then give the patient three nights of chickens broth. 
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After you raise his head, and make a cautery with half an olive's worth of oil. 
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a bit below the hairs. 
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it. 
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	from which this is the form
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.  
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not remove your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	when a hair pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to a reddish brown, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: 
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine. 
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For a fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; 
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are grown and even, then put the patient in a healthy state;  
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	then draw on paper a shape like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; 
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then he puts softened cotton in egg white and parsley mucilage on the eye, then heats the cautery which has this shape: 
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the face that you have marked dot by dot many times, so that the heart is burned at the spot; 
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper pull back, and the hairs rise at the point of the needle; 
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it so for three days, then put cotton softened in butter until the burn is removed; 
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on the same spot as you did first; 
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are gone out, then cauterize as long as the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and does not prick the hairs at the eye.  
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning medical cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and equal, then make a shape from parchment like the leaf of myrtle. 
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one dram, and grind together well;  
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on top of the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put eye drops on the paper. 
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the sickness is only in one eye, you should work on that one, and if in both also. 
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And put moistened cotton under the eye soaked in egg white. 
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And let the patient's head be in your healthy hand and put your index finger showing on top of the medicine, and press the spot and the pus every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for he will feel it as if from fire.  
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite has passed, lift the area away from the water and see if you notice the skin raised as though it were raised by the constraint of fire or by incision. 
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it is so, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, apply more of the medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal and your eyes are aligned. 
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply softened cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is healed; afterwards cleanse the area of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to be careful about your work with great care so that it does not fall from the medicine, nor these.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, begin the medicine again on that area which is softened by the skin properly, just as you have done before. 
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the healing as long as it is healed; 
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the mortar of myrtle:  
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that are your constraints; 
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the right way be answered to he who is the study of this art.  
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; 
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the ministers' head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he lower his head; 
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards put softened cotton in egg white or in parsley juice on the eye;  
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	afterwards heat the cautery which is like this: 
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and is shaped at the head as the shape of a dove's feather, together with which is the cautery; 
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see it, if it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see it, if it is also like a tent 
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But nevertheless, this which is cut off is worth moving for your work. 
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After press the fistula if it is open, and in treat the decay, and dry it;  
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, so work it, and treat beyond the intestine; 
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After put on the hot cautery iron, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part where there is no bone above the eye, so that your hands do not shake; 
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.  
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come at the beginning of the cautery down to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, so start the cautery again yet once more, and another if you need it, and leave it 3 days; 
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Then he puts softened cotton soaked in butter on it, and cures it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, he puts a corrosive aqueous medicine on it until the bone is exposed; 
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king according to what he would bring in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand it is a fistula, and make the place; 
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Then put in the fissure a subtle linen thread of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it to the quantity of a three-fingers length of thread
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or the linen firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted threads do not run into his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put softened cotton soaked in wine vinegar or in water on the patient's eye.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	If a stone is inserted into the place of a fistula, and the healthy tissue heals miraculously. 
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer an opening to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body through the nose according to what is appropriate in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times fissures occur in the lips which are called "hairs," and likewise in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures of those that we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not profit, then heat a small surgical cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it hastily in those crevices until it reaches the font. 
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, treat the place with wax until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it is decayed and rotten and has aged and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all.  
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Then you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula. 
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After making the hole or opening in the fistula, hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and wherever there is last place.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do so once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed. 
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is treated thus, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, you must uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what you will find in its chapter. 
dou movement des dens	tooth movements
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it is of no avail, then place the patient's head in your lap. 
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	Then heat the cautery, which will be described later, in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth. 
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And quickly insert the hot cautery, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth. 
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	Then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After the patient fills his mouth with salt water, let him hold it for an hour and then spit it out. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: 
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and a butter cautery and a fire cautery. 
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	A butter cautery is done by taking cow butter and putting a bit of it in an iron or silver spoon; 
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent peg, dip it in boiled butter, and place it hastily on the aching tooth and hold it until it cools; 
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in cold butter are placed on the aching tooth, and hot iron is applied until the fire reaches the top of the tooth. 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauteries are such that you take a cane of iron or wood, and it is large enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth. 
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After you heat the cautery, from which the shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.  
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then refresh it strongly.  
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever shape you desire, and according to what you are able.  
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the shape of the cane: 
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is of phlegm and cold humors, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with hair, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side. 
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. 
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it thus for three days. 
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And place softened cotton steeped in butter on it until the burn is gone. 
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When humors overcome the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged by dissolving medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, be careful not to go near the throat itself and only burn a small spot. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you apply the other cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, it should be called a "clavile" because we have that shape in front. 
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.  
de la toust	From the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and every disease of the pormon is from cold moisture and the patient has neither fever nor thirst and the illness is old, you should apply two cauteries on the armpit.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And another cautery between the breasts. 
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And these cauteries should be called "claviles" according to the shape that has been said before.  
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with the entire cautery called "point" whose shape is shown before in the ailment of the ears. 
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points be up to thirty or more. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be 3 hands in length according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason are the cauteries lighter, because you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards lay the patient on his back and on his side.  
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	Then lift the heart which is inside the nipple with the two fingers of your left hand. 
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the jointure is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	And cauterize the heart until it pierces to the side, and the figure of the cautery will be together with four cauteries. 
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this is made a cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries. 
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves. 
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is it placed upon this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put the cautery on top of bruised herbs with thread; 
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then let the patient rest and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well fortified. 
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it is extracted to its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and customary methods of cures are used and they do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be turned on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Afterward make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the quantity of two, at all the cauteries clave and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and has half space between the one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will rot; 
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauteries be so perfect that they penetrate both parts of the heart and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment. 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see someone cauterized with a large cautery iron in the stomach according to this form; 
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach a point according to the quantity that you see of encroachment; 
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the whole cautery iron which is called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes to have pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities; 
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of this as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be treated according to his nature; 
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and sign of encroachment three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, deflecting the hypochondria, where the sides of the spleen come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be a space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb; 
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries; 
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and only half of the heart should be burned, and the patient should be straight on his feet; 
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms; 
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, you can cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole heart, for you would dry up the whole body; 
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you will see it by looking. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: 
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe; 
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.  
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment requires purging, it is necessary that the patient be raised up on his head; 
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, in this way: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the core is burned and comes to a boil, until the pore is entirely open;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of the abscesses until he is healed; 
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not fitting that anyone other than he who has studied long in the art of medicine and whose hands have cured these illnesses many times use this cautery.  
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly work, and nonetheless it seems to me that letting it be is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make several cauteries from aristoloche roots, and in this way: 
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long aristoloche root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm. 
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And moisten it in oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize with it between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower on the part below the beard. 
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind.  
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cautery under the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as far down the sides from the breast as the cautery is between the two shoulders. 
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand, but make it openly as if smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients say that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess. 
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And then the pain will cease, as we have said in the liver abscess. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patients now die, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of the cures we have said, and it does not profit at all, then apply three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of these, one method is that you make III or IV cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before; 
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient often turn on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II points, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is located near the mouse, or where the sides of the patient come towards the left, and let the elevations from which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After he puts the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then draws fire from the cautery, and thus he will have four. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, that cauterizing the whole cautery to three nerves.  
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has festered for a long time, this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is of no use for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the shoulder blade, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast;  
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be very close to the species of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to prevent putrefaction, and do not leave the patient's care after the cautery; 
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the cleaver that we have shown before; 
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and the one for the back should be oval-shaped, according to what has been mentioned before.  
de l’enfleure des piez	from the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsy-stricken and are full of yellow water, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; 
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and apply your hand with the cautery without turning.  
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with the point, lest you burn the surrounding flesh excessively, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterward, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife; 
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, midway up the leg; 
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and let the cauteries lie long without cleaning so that it may rise. 
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the cure of the other cures that we have said. 
de la menoison	Of the setting
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary methods; 
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before or a stomach cautery, a circular cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauteries around the belly subtle and all the cauteries subtly pinned, and two cauteries on the hips. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and a cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the navel, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and they are old and made up of thick cold and damp corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries. 
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III on the spine of the back, which is all behind below the armpit bit by bit in a triangle, and I the cautery below the shoulder II must. 
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one puts a large cautery on the stomach, as it is previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the thigh with all the cauteries clavile. 
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And let the cautery stay open for a long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut an althelul (likely a type of bandage or dressing), if it is heated so that it seems like a razor, and then put all inflamed on the said althelul.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And you leave it so that both your hand and the cautery come to the beginning of the vein, so that the blood is cut.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of swelling, cauterize each one as we have said. 
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment of wounds, make sure they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize a large area with a large cautery, it will be more helpful. 
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly healed
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in their place, then there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes and is aged and has putrid rotting moisture, then you must test its depth with a delicate probe, and be careful that you know the entire depth of how many parts it has.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tentacle has entered, and start again with the cautery until those corrupted and rotten bodies are burned once, twice or three times depending on the amount needed. 
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and the large veins.  
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful of these areas, and do not cauterize except in a fleshy place, and remember that it is not a piercing.  
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treatment the place until it is healed, and if the wound is closed and the matter is removed for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed.  
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is bad, and it corrupts the bone at its base. 
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And as one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the sickness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes as rain, and from great windiness, and does not take solace from a woman, then it is fitting that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the pointed cautery that we have previously said. 
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help.  
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder where the hairs begin at the hipbone, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the tip of a thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And make him fire the cautery on his back wherever you need it. 
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	Let the cautery be sharpened according to the shape previously mentioned. 
de la marris	from the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; 
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is fitting to make three cauteries around the buttocks as we have said of the bladder cautery, and two cauteries on his back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauteries be sharpened as we have said. 
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moisture descends to the hip joint and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and the place of separation is found on two sides, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip in a circle-shaped burn, and mark in front of the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle. 
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And let the cautery be such as those with which one cauterizes the stomach. 
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-wood cauteries, and let the cautery be as perfect as all the others.  
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cauterize it until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the bone of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure is ineffective, and the illness is old: 
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-seeming pills. 
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterward apply the cautery; 
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of applying the cautery is according to two methods: 
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together burning medicaments and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:  
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the box of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and put between each cautery a space the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.  
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Once done, make one cautery in the middle above the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form:  
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if the cauterizer with a cautery makes a circle as we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; 
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make it in such a way that the circles encompass the whole hip, and all the flesh around the heart be burned. 
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip, and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is strongest, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a prick. 
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cauteries be sharp-edged, and burn through the thickness of the flesh. 
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or nearby, then cauterize him there where he feels the pain three times or four times with a cautery called "point". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, make them more; 
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave it so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more pain and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have done cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purging of the belly from which he had death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the surgeons say about cautery of the hip, which is the manner: make such a tool and at its head as thick as a nail, or a little less, and it should be grooved, from one groove to the other with a space the size of a thumb's knot; 
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the grooves be facing in two parts, and also be like knots, and it should have a well-made iron handle;
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And it should be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the box of the bad hip, and it should be turned on the healthy side; 
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the cautery one time when the cautery is red hot and leave it for III days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	And then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; 
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure with ointment until it is healed. 
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone who uses it; 
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless it is a good cautery, for whoever can endure it, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you make an instrument with crossbars in which the edge of the door descends, and it is made of iron or steel with a long handle, and at its height there are two knobs, and between each knob there is the thickness of a finger;  
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they should be opened with fire and above, and joined together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and immediately put your hand very firmly on the box of the hip; 
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place between the two circles of a hot awl that has been heated in the fire for one hour or so, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning sensation.  
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there is a biting sensation as well as from fire. 
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the biting sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hip awl gently, and leave it like that for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the burn is removed. 
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And let it stay for three days so that putrefaction is drawn out;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments until it is healed 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, you must make the instrument that holds tight according to what you have done in the hip properly; 
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the way of the hot awe, and I wrote it or treated it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there be a small opening so that the point of a razor can enter; 
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put that pot on top of another pot well sealed, and put alkali and lime and soft heat on top until there are two handfuls of powder and you will have prepared it well in your hand; 
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it like that until hot and thick vapor descends into the sealed pot, then take all that vapor, and pour it onto heat and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very acute and is administered in soft work of medicine and cauteries on other members. 
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs other work like fire, and if with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hip thus turpentine and honey of sumac and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a remedy by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, saying that no other remedy was done, and that he was healed at one time when this remedy was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in this manner that you take two drachmas of fresh green litharge and grind it very much with a bit of fat and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain lies and bind it. 
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.  
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make it enter or bathe so that its body is a little aroused, and make it enter or bed, and the pain will go away entirely and it will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat droppings, it helps a lot.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And it must be done in this manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen cloth and soak it with old oil and put it on the hollow between the thumb and the finger which is called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After you take goat horns that are dry, and burn them until they are charcoal, then put them on wool, and leave them until they are extinguished. 
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do this again likewise, and do not cease to do so until you think by feeling that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is gone. 
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this manner of cautery is called "goat horn cautery". 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by similar spread of cold matter, none of these cases are worth cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is fitting that after this the patient is purged with fetid pills or other similar things, and that they are made on their back, where the pain lies, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure. 
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see it, make three or four cauteries with a medium-sized fire cautery according to this form: 
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight throat when they wake up, and fear; 
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.  
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cauterize it, then cauterize it with a branding iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery properly burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful that you do not apply the cautery in a gibbosity which is in the spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pains are from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctor properly calls "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: 
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need for you to grasp the face of the foot, if you burn it with the whole cautery we call "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries on each side, with olive oil. 
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand too long so that only the thickness of a kernel is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, apply the cautery that we have described in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines. 
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there is any pain left in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand. 
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and take medicine. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the bone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes in the groin and the bowels descend to the buttocks and it is recent, it is necessary that when you see it cleansed, he should not eat anything that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and let him use things which loosen the belly so that the bowels descend from his belly 
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are repaired and set them right at your will, and press down below the break on the bone of the shoulder blade and at all one sign that resembles half a circle above the body 
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery which has this shape 
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it drips pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels to their place 
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and have the assistant hold his hand so they do not return backwards 
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well on the patient's thighs and put a cushion under him and a sergeant on his thighs and another on his foot who holds his hands 
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone and if you do not reach it the first time start again another time until you arrive at the bone 
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and carefully guard so that the eye does not weep when you do the cautery. 
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it.  
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that through this, the patient does not die or suffer other ills. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is fitting that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their age, and those for adults as large according to theirs.  
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, treat the area of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed.  
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	Afterward, treat it with other remedies until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well. 
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is fitting that his bandages be loosened gradually, so that the eye does not weep when he prepares to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage and have him wear it for forty other days. 
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too loud shouting; 
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this instruction he will be completely healed. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here afterwards the treatment of cutting in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the breaking of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When tumors come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery with a cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the core; 
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said; 
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the break, and another behind it, and hold your hand steady with the entire hot iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery that is called "points," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and its location of twists and turns and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healed from the first cautery, it is good; 
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if not, start another cautery on top of the first one, because it is customary that it should change to the member that is closest to it, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healed. 
de meselerie	from surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mesentery is helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and the same disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you see it cauterize, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the sick person, then do V cauteries on the head: 
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I smear the head with new [ointment], and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs; 
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave as long as your hand that the cauteries reach to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize above the mouse according to what is before it. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the misery is everywhere scattered; 
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it loses visibly, then you must cauterize with those cauteries that we have said or the chief one and two cauteries on the spine of the neck and six cauteries on the spine of the back and one large one on the rump and another nearby and two on the two shoulders; 
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the elbows and two on the tendons of the foot and one on each joint of the hands and feet and on the pits of the hands; 
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the heel bone, so that you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cautery on the bone of the elbow and one other on the bone of the stomach and one other on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when you do more cautery, you help more, and it increases the benefit. 
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that sick people do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because the body is already all corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing, cover the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in a limb and is treated with medicine and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size. 
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cauteries be a prick entering into the thickness of the flesh.  
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with unguents until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes one makes a cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed. 
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And nonetheless no one should interfere with it unless they know the limbs and the outlets of the nerves that move the body.  
de albaras	of alabaster
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness which is called "albaras" is old, and the engine of medicine is worthless, then cauterize a perfect spot with a cautery, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed. 
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then make a plaster of flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of dove and blood of almond, of each one part. 
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and air it in place until it is healed. 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of a chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery iron that resembles a circle, encircling the entire chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nevertheless the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times; 
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and further back it is necessary that he be cauterized around with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said in the discourse of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an ailment which is called "adubelati," and it delays in dying either because of the superfluity it causes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; 
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you wish to hasten its death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking. 
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it thus.  
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through all of the cautery, heat the cautery as follows.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that illness which is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in this way so that the course of the rot is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a gnawing away of the limbs, for it eats at the limbs just as fire eats at dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this ailment in a place which can suffer cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large according to what suits the place where the ailment is; 
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cauterizing all sides so that you eradicate all the corruption and nothing of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days and put on the wounds cauterized soft bread crumbs with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of wounds engendering flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good;  
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted flesh. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this ailment has sometimes been cured with a hot medicinal wash in place of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure with a hot medicinal wash in the division: 
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the leeches that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that with fire a disease arises which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large evil thing which bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot iron cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron as hot as a goose feather quill and make it of good iron to the measure that it can burn the nail on all sides, and that it has delicate edges. 
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After placing it all hot on the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail. 
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And leave it like that for three days until it begins to rot. 
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a plaster of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.  
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the place of cautery by anointing it with fat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by fire the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer a hot iron cautery. 
et est en teil maniere:	And it is in this manner: 
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a cane of iron or steel, or a feather of an arrow, and put it on the nail and the surrounding flesh, that is to say warts.  
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And put the cane on so that it surrounds it entirely, then apply a piece of hot coal, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and the hot iron can find its way deep to the root. 
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a bite from the hot iron for an hour; 
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it like that, and all its roots will be pulled out.  
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do one after another, until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat the inflammations which produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone trembles from cold nerves, or a quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; 
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery;  
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	they will stop trembling, and their health will quickly recover from the cold illness. 
des pustules puans	Of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear by fire burns on the body, or stinking pustules, which come from corrupt large matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is fitting, at first when they appear, that one make a cautery on each head of the pustule:  
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery from myrtle wood, in which the point is grasped by fire, or a long aristolochia root, or a lentil cautery. 
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never apply cautery at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further in front, but the superfluity from which they come is broken, and they are healed. 
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes to the firebrand, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; 
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grievous thing to staunch. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein and press it very hard until the blood is quieted beneath your finger and no drop issues forth; 
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put several small and large olive oil cauters on the fire until they are all red. 
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cauter on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauter on it until the blood is stopped up. 
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps forward when you lift your hand from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another cautery that is in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped up. 
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;  
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped up immediately, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways that we have said. 
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong ligature of thread, or by medicines placed on top which have the power to stop blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and let it be bound and restrained tightly. 
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who would apply a bandage tightly with cloths or put burning things on it, or other similar things, it will not help and will do harm.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have neither mirror nor medicine present, they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press well until it is rested upon the wound and upon the vein; 
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and rested; 
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about those who need to cauterize and those who need medicine. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of cutting
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the uses and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; 
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have put this chapter from the top to the bottom, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that those who wish can find it more easily. 
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this one, it befits, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein and incising an abscess and in the treatment of wounds and in the extraction of arrows and in cutting into stones and similar things 
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear and many die. 
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if there are some who torment themselves so much with their illness that they die easily because of the fierceness they find in their illness and its severity 
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one must have fear. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are some who give you their sense and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	“wait, I am cured” 
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely of those of whom you are certain and of whom you can take oaths.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatments of your patients so that health may be converted. 
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and long remembrance. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordained this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to that which is before it or the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find that which you shall need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A head full of sharp pain
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the baby's head too forcefully; 
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.  
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this ailment except in children, and all those I have seen hastened towards death; 
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason it seems to me better to leave such treatments to others.  
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulders were full of pain, and whose head grew larger each day until it could no longer support it; 
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered below the bone above the shoulder blade, between the heart and the bone; 
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the works are such if moisture is between the flesh and bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split between the head a wide fissure; 
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it be also as long as two fingers, while the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see this shape of a spatula: 
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the sharp pain leaps forth when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered by you: 
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it befits that you split between the head three fissures according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	Afterwards, remove the fissures with cloths and powders, and he puts wine and oil, and leaves it thus until the fifth day; 
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then he unbinds it, and heals the wound with bandages and ointments, and leaves the head to be straightened equally, and let the patient eat dry meat free of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point; 
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never in front; 
aucune fois derrier;	never behind;  
aucune fois en destre;	never to the right; 
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the left. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore cut there where the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point, and make the incision according to your power; 
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cut an artery; 
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and a vein flows blood so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.  
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there occurs in someone an ailment called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the breast and the ailment is old, and the cure of medicine does not profit at all, then the last resort is cautery with which one severs the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore it is necessary, when you see them cut, for the patient to turn their head back; 
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck to the whole cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein flows, and the temples on each side are behind the ears, and they are filled. 
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the temples with a notch, then cut one and the other with a sharp knife of two parts, until the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done across the breadth of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, put the spatula below the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it must through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark a notch and cut down to the bone; 
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and as much blood as is needed to withdraw should be six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery.  
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound: 
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone and there is a pustule, cut it so that pus does not flow in, then drain the wound and bandage it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.  
de emigrainne	from migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to moisture from tears and the heat in the temples and a strong ancient humoral imbalance and similar things, and it is treated by medical remedies and all of this does him no good, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is such that the patient should make a fist with the hairs of his temples and listen to the artery which opens in the temple for it opens well by its beating and is less full outside than in some men who are too cold; 
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is full, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth and raise the place with hot water so that the artery appears clearly. 
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the shape:  
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin slightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with pincers and carefully remove the membranes that are below it from each side. 
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two ends.  
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not copied, it will not jump at all altogether.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw blood from the sixth rib to the third. 
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that decay does not come before the wound heals, and blood flows. 
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery blade down to the bone so that the flesh is cut. 
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the milder operation if the patient does not have a fever and is of hot complexion. 
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauteries help to finish off moisture:  
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Therefore it is of greater help against moisture. 
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	When it is necessary to extract arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tents on top. 
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are loosened, let them be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth, and with bandages, until they are healed. 
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if without cutting the artery as much as you work, hurry to cauterize it or apply vitriol to the area and hold it with your hand until the blood is stopped. 
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you don't have it available, put your thumb on the area until the blood freezes, and apply cold water to the area until the bleeding stops, and extract it as needed. 
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and the best and easiest way to extract an artery is to cauterize the vein of this two-pronged cautery, but make sure the prongs are well spaced to hold their heat longer. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	There should be a space of one finger width between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two spots, place the hot iron on them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. 
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let them be spaced apart between the two heads for it is not soldered together at all. 
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery: 
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on top of the head of a feverish person, and no cure of medicine profits them at all, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and feel their forehead pulsating like a tremor; 
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if they are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall out, and the papers are heated and scorched by the ardor of the tears, then this cure is necessary. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the ancient "bruised cure," and what you do is shave the hair from the back of the head of a patient with this illness, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; 
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And let one of the incisions be as it should all go down the forehead by swallowing until the nose, and the others you shall make with the ribs above the papers, and beware of incising the arteries that are on the sides above the papers.  
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And remove your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints. 
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a piece of sponge and much linen for wiping the blood, then put in the spatula sharp on two sides as follows is its shape. 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scrape out all the flesh which is between the two incisions until all the fat which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.  
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first crack, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp edge towards the flesh that is burned at the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and push until it comes to the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to these parts so that the incision is continuous until you reach those that open onto the heart, and then again make another incision in the middle fissure until the other side. 
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken. 
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and place on it cloths softened in wine and oil and alum, and guard that no boils come there. 
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day untie the bandage, and bring a large poultice of hot water, then the ointment cure with rose oil, and other cures for which we cure wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When some acute catarrh comes along customarily, and you see these things small and weak, and dim the sight, and burn the papers. 
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs fall out, and his head is filled with sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; 
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then know by these signs that those humors and phlegm do not come from a single vein, and the remedy for it is this. 
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to lie on his back, then make a large incision between the forehead and a second one at the width of a finger's breadth.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin at the left temple and cut to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; 
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when chewing;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two edges of the incision cotton wool and linen bandages;  
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind soft cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and be careful not to let an abscess form there.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, you must rub the bone until it starts to produce flesh, and then treat it with drying agents which will promote the growth of flesh.  
En teil maniere:	In this manner: 
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster. 
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And administer it to these wounds to draw out the flesh. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls in the ears is one of four things: 
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Either grain, or beast, or a stone from a mine or similar things such as iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	Or seed, such as acorns, beans, peas; 
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Or flowing things such as water and easily flowing things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other object lodges in the ear that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in it, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then distill some oil of violets or sesame oil, and then administer an extraction. 
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And make it sneeze vigorously, and stop its nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. 
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and raise the ear above. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times strength comes by this treatment.  
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if strength does not come, administer extraction with subtle pincers, of which this is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps with strength with the pincers, that is good. 
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, administer extraction with a subtle awl of small diameter.  
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not jump with that, make a cane of iron and push the head of the cane or the hole of the ear hard, and plug what is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane. 
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment will come forth strong, for many times strength comes as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come forth in any manner, take glue of which one takes birds, and put some instrument that is suitable for doing so in the middle, and put a piece of cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the hot iron on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw hard. 
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not flow out from all the things we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as if it were an abscess with hot blood, and spasm. 
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of incision is such that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein and draw out blood according to the measure of his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or wherever it depends; 
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And let the incision be shaped like a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then press the stone according to your power and suck it quickly into your mouth. 
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue the treatment until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.  
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if he cannot urinate, give him a thin, delicate spatula according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is wet from moisture of the ear until you have made many pieces of it. 
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with delicate pincers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute pain then when a bone is in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a sneeze first of all, and widely fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps far because of it, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many stones according to the length of your finger, light and slender, and heat them a little in the fire; 
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place one or two of them on the patient's ear, and press upon it from their feet on the other side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear; 
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to do this stone on stone until the sharp pain is entirely gone, and thus it will all be gone. 
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see it, take the joint, and put one of its heads in the ear, and grasp the other head with fire until the softer joint is burned. 
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then redo another part of other joints until the sharpness subsides entirely, as we have said regarding stones. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of a beast, if it is of small size, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; 
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large size that one can feel it, then administer extraction with pincers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sunlight: 
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are any worms, take them out with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the cane whose shape is this: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	Insert the smallest end into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck up all the cane. 
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.  
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, stuff cotton around the cane as I have said in the stone. 
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations.  
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which this is the shape as you see. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether of silver or iron, it is three below at the small holes, and above it covers to distil. 
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press within the distillation is an instrument of iron well made for it, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point with cotton. 
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then it drips your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube is in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear. 
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the patient smell it within, and whether the distillation is a little heated over the fire so it is distilled in the ear. 
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have some perforation in their ears; 
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens to adults through a wound or a splinter lodged in the ear, and this damage sometimes comes perfectly inside the ear so that it cannot be seen; 
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes the hole widens because of fire, and one sees it well. 
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes perfectly and cannot be seen is of a healing grievance in several ways, and in this case it behoves you to put the patient's ear in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside: 
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see an apparent obstruction, then the work has this whole form of which this is the shape: 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	It should be sharp and cutting in front and behind entirely flat so that it does not wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the ingrown hair is from flesh near the ear or the cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers and gently pluck it until all the hair is removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is performed perfectly in the ear, then take a very subtle razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the ingrown hair that the patient feels pain near the ear, pierce it gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear. 
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the piercing, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water and powdered vitriol. 
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you draw out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerate made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and cloths into cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other remedies that stop bleeding, which are found in treatises on distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is the tool that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, so it is fitting that you extend them with pincers and forceps, and the cup of a spatula from its roots. 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put on the place crushed vitriol. 
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without it being cut off, then cauterize with a subtle lentil-shaped cautery, and cauterize after the incision is made. 
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they repair themselves, so that nothing remains of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all. 
de la gresle	of gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers of the eyes some things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hail," and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper above and below. 
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such: 
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make the donkey's skin wide then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers and cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of paper, do not worry about the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the fissure is large, sew it together with a stitch and treat it until it heals. 
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for ointments will soon restore it and generate flesh. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hail descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and hold the hail with pincers, cut it and press on one side and the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter. 
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the hailstone is removed, wash it with warm salt water and treat the place where it entered as long as the patient is healed.  
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that accumulates on cloths and papers, and it happens more to children than to adults, and it grieves their eyes greatly, and they get catarrh in the mornings and cannot look at the sun because tears rush to their eyes. 
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And for this reason they lie down on their faces and sleep on them, with their papers under their eyebrows, so wet that the swelling and appearance are covered by the exinach which appears in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the bone coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the way to do the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy place; 
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that it contains, exiting from each part, then put it on top. 
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with both your hands on one side and the other so that the exiting matter is gathered within the circle. 
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make in the middle of the moisture a sharp incision with a knife, a slit no wider than the wound that one makes when opening a vein.  
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And cut through the skin completely until you reach the exiting matter. 
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in several configurations, matter will exit the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.  
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then extract it all at once with a piece of clean cloth between your hands, turning your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.  
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and guard that you do not insert into the fissure so that you reach all the way to the eye, lest you bruise it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly until it appears. 
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in water and vinegar, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind flaxseed and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the site of a hot abscess, then apply soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow from planted paper and are aged, they harm the eyes, and bring about manners of illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the eyelids, as long as it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And the treatment is according to four manners:  
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by fire cautery, or by sharp medicine according to what is before it or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and suture or by canes, according to what I will say. 
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your knee, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand. 
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, it is good; 
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, if you insert a needle along its entire length. 
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be below the margin of the paper where the hair grows from those hairs, and draw the thread along the top of the entire paper, and turn it to the razor; 
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, along the entire spatula, from the large tear duct to the small one. 
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then extract the thread and place below the paper a small tent of cotton and linen; then draw upon the paper a shape like a myrtle leaf, and in all ways it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity you see raising the paper which is divided into parts.  
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if there is need for someone to have a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; 
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make all along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from large tears to small; 
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all; 
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then bring together the two lips with a stitch from a needle with all fine woolen thread, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess of the threads dry on the two eyebrows without using any gluing substances if you see fit to do so;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, do not worry about it, then leave the suture and threads until three or four days;  
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then heal the wound without stitching with drying and constricting things, for paper comes alive at the sewing of the wound and its assembly, but stitching is slow (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear. 
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there's another way: 
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you sign the paper in a shape like the leaf of myrtle as we have told, at 3 ounces dried according to the form which is here:  
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then let him who has little strength do it equally according to the form that is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take a needle where it has one thread and put it in the shape. 
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And put one other thread behind the large tear, and the second thread behind the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally. 
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift your hand equally and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching and cure it until it is healed. 
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; 
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And it sometimes happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: 
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	Then you must use what we have said about incision; 
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But the suture in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure of boils is according to this form: 
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And that you convert the paper and insert it within according to what I have said, and then make two boils by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the width of a spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut as two ends where you hold the threads; 
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then assemble one and the other subtly upon that which rises from the paper of the oil, and strain the two boils from the two parts they form;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it like that for several days, and the skin which will be stretched will die and harden and bear, as long as it wishes by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the head has some strength, then treat it until it is healed; 
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is closed and the paper is lifted, and the hairs no longer grow; 
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the shape of the two canes that you will make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the works are such that you take a fine needle, and put a thin silk thread through it; 
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the heads and tie them subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;  
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the chase another thin silk thread quickly, and tie the heads of the threads; 
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head on your lap; 
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be in the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle at full speed into the root of the hair closest to the joint, and make it pierce quickly through the skin following the natural direction of the hair. 
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the joint and insert it into the joint if there are one or two or three or more hairs. 
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out of the joint along with the skin following the natural direction of the hair. 
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the joint is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the joint downwards along the thread that you have ordered, until the joint comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eyes. 
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you should treat the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows up over it; 
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a horse's tail with it, and let it grow together with the one you are leaving it with until it is elongated and then remove it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the rotting of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness which is called "aleacratio" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: 
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs through a wound incision, or by cutting with a cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to treat it is that you cut the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put flax tents in it, and bind it until it heals. 
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And it is not fitting that you use things in its treatment that dry and constrict.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first. 
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	But work with softening things, such as fenugreek; 
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And rose of aquilegia or allspice and flaxseed are cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in any of the oils, and it wraps a tent, and cures it from this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure are that you take care that it does not fuse according to the form it was before; 
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And this work that we have said is nothing more than the direction of this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness which is below, which is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauteries and similar things; 
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of working it is that you take a needle with a double thread and stick it into the flesh and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the flesh is cut above all the needle, and the cup at the spatula wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good;  
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take the razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits or cuts on either side within the paper; 
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a Greek letter “Y”; 
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh, according to the amount its sides are affected below, so as not to tear the paper, then rejoin the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool;  
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the care that we have mentioned of softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the ailment comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, it is fitting that you make a full incision below the hairs of the skin, and according to what has been said before. 
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.  
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must do the work according to the form of the ailment, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare all sorts of tools so that they can make the shape return to its natural form. 
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patients themselves, according to what is fitting for work and instruments are in several positions. 
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the skin above is stuck with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural works, then you must put the point of a razor under the skin and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and hold them like pincers, as long as you grasp that which is airy with a subtle spatula, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient can only suffer from the spatula being too sharp and not bleed. 
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And let your incision, by which you scrape off the assembled skin, be slightly made so that the paper revives according to its natural form. 
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And heal all that is assembled, and do it sometimes in the sharp saline eye, and raise it with sweet water, and with broth. 
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place a tent of linen between the paper and the eye, and put woolen cloth soaked in abundance of egg on top of the eye.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after the third day, use warm broth and similar things until it is healed. 
de l’ungle de l’oil	from the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners: 
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and appears like hard fat, and another which is not nervous but appears like white frozen moisture, that when you touch it with iron and think to pinch it, you cannot. 
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both kinds begin toward the great tear duct and grow bit by bit until they cover the whole eye and all the light and the movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head on a sound pillow, then he opens his eyes;  
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper to your hand, then hold the needle with small forceps and extend it above; 
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle and put a hair of horse, or cow, or ox, with strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a bit and stick it in the needle, and pierce it through with the whole needle, and tie the needle with thread and extend it above, and flay all the hair on the side of the needle that touches the caruncle and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the rest at the root of the tear duct with a very fine spatula and small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tear duct, so that through the incision does not come the accustomed body fluids;  
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes they have fastened the nail to the awl alone, as we said. 
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then, having skinned it, one takes all the spatula smooth of which this is the form: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the kernel is not pierced. 
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	And after the incision, put a piece of silk thread into the eye, and make a collar out of silver, and leave it until the next day. 
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal what is necessary so that it may be healed.  
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the awl cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicine. 
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the eye of the patient, and take a light sharp piece according to this form.  
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And lift the bone subtly, and if you see that it decreases not and the reason hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead, finely ground, and keep the eye until the next day. 
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.  
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye greatly, suspend it at the corner, and cover part of it and not all, so that fluid does not enter. 
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.  
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows upon the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men a red flesh never is born, and cover the prunes and restrain them on papers and turn them in the fire, and they resemble a rose of baluster. 
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the works are such that the patient puts his head in good health, then he works the eyes, and all the flesh with suitable needles for this, and supports it with strength; 
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first flesh, and go cutting all the way with the razor to the end, and be careful that you do not bruise the eye during the work; 
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be along the spatula that we have said in the incision of the nail and with small force by which one removes the splinter, as the shape after this chapter demonstrates; 
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress or you distill red cochineal and similar corrosive medicines, and put hot cotton oil with a little egg white on top so that it is well assured against a hot abscess;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains there and the sock covers it, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess. 
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is healed, and do the same when a splinter is lodged in the eye. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you relieve the treatment of each weak eye by its natural path; 
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from accidental paths in ironwork.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from this work. 
des voines des eulz	of veins of eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Blood vessels are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate their work to sight and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary in the first place that you look to see if the eye is weak or strong, and there is no other illness except pain. 
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then proceed in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Command the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins at every inch according to his wisdom, and let the inches be subtle double according to this form. 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be applied in degrees throughout the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then one coils those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move away from the eye; 
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be careful that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only sever those veins; 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains of the humor. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and you are sure of a hot abscess, then start again according to this manner which is before until he is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of forces: 
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The one called "arissati" makes a fistula: 
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it by cautery and by burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess, where it should dwell, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed. 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, then take all the instruments with which it is made. 
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "sharp point," and is made of iron at the front end, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed. 
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines. 
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound is sealed, and flesh grows, and the body of the gut is sealed, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accidents occur, know that it is healed; 
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this is not the case, if there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the anus opening according to this form:  
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with an iron instrument, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, and let the head of the drill have three angles, and let the shaft be tapered down to a point as you see here: 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and remove your hand from the oil one finger's breadth away, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone, and let the patient feel this by the vein that flows out if they hold their hand on their thigh; 
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the place, the matter goes to naught. 
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	This is an easier thing for the patient.  
de l’issue de l’oil	from the outflow of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye opens entirely and there is no hindrance in the nose or decrease, then it is fitting that you bind the patient. 
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then the healthy one, then put on leeches or a cupping glass without iron to suck, then put on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocol, and then strain the eye, and plaster with bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity the eye needs.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then strain it with a hard bandage, and start again the cupping to suck without hurting. 
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then you must strain it a lot. 
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the ligament after a day and night, and if you see the oil recover, it is good.  
se ce non;	If not; 
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	start again the plaster and cloths and the ligament and cupping glasses until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	when rupture of cloth with
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When a disruption comes in the woven fabric, then open it up, and remove strips of paper as fine as grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then thrust another needle where there is a doubled thread from the tear duct.  
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; 
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then take the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the eye around it, and pull it tight, then remove the needle and put a softened linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white on top; 
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread loosens with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; 
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and once the wound is restricted by the eye on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye has a large appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes perfectly from the eye, and correct the whitish moisture and remove the eye, and it will heal quickly;  
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed. 
de la bowe de l’oil	from the hollow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called “alcunnati” is nothing but a bowel assembled in the eye, resembling descending fire, and it is not fire; 
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of performing the operation is such that you make the patient sit upright on a suitable seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so that you see the bowel come up above your eyes; 
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and not descend, and relieve the light, and let the patient see things as he used to; 
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is fire, and if the descending of the bowel is not as we have said. 
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and cut on the horny membrane one spot along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny membrane and the cornea, as long as the bowel rises; 
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is drawn out, distill into the sharp hot oil mixed with honey, or hot water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of sharp points of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the resemblances of needles in the division, and what it is fitting to pierce.  
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	If in work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind his good eye tightly. 
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper from the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right. 
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called “almagda,” or in your left hand if the eye is right. 
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument near the crown through the thickness of a reed at that part of the eye where there is least tear gland. Then push the instrument which is called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces through the part of the eye, and feel that the almagda enters into the empty space. 
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda passage be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part. 
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in this paper due to the clarity of the corneal veil, then put the instrument as far as where the point is, and then press it out below, one way after another. 
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it is sharp now, the patient sees it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	Afterwards rest a little, and if the point goes back up the second time, put force on it with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand bit by bit. 
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then put back into it a drop of gemstone juice, and lift from it the eye within. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put a cloth or linen moistened in rose oil and plenty of egg yolk on it, and tie it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on a common poultice with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called “alberit”, of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And so pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in almond, as we have said; 
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And for the completion of the work, prepare the patient a sleeping doctor approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; 
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And let it be devoid of all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let it be bound according to its position until the third day; 
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then untie it in the same dark house, and test its sight, and make it see some things, and then tie it back until the seventh day; 
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not fitting that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you delay this, because the humor rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When an abscess comes, loosen the bandage before the seventh day, and apply what dries up the abscess.  
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is appeased, loosen the bandage and put a linen cloth over it to cover for several days, and keep it in a darkened room. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then gradually go outside little by little, and return to your normal activities.  
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that no disciple should interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	A man from Yrach came to us who told us that in his homeland they made an almond cake which causes a sharp pain, but for all that I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. 
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of almond shapes so that those who do not know them may recognize them. 
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be of good iron 
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh comes the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there are born or found diverse joined chariots, from which some appear like scorpions with many feet; 
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such that have a chariot enchanted of fox color, and if a chariot seems of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that then of these chariots which is of good color and not enchanted, it is fitting that you make the sick person sit between your hands against the sun; 
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open their nostrils, and put the ointment on those chariots, and draw them forth;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	for as much as you can sustain it at a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that chariot is all taken out. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains any thing which one cannot take out, then work with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without overcoming it, or an abscess arises, so cut it as it is necessary; 
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them so that the pus is dried up and all the humors are removed, then apply fresh wine vinegar. 
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy. 
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is a humor in the bone above, to which the instruments do not come to cut. 
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then it is necessary that you put a linen thread a little thick, and knotted with our hands, and have between each knot a space of one inch or less. 
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And put the patient's shoulder on the thread in his nose at its bottom, and draw it while smelling as much as it comes through the nose into the mouth. 
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many times they do so to children at schools, and it is a light thing for whoever wants to do it. 
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and draw them out one after the other as we are who are skilled at it. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the worms have corrupted the flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before. 
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode everything that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then insert into the nose a cane of lead for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines or other things 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and conducts it as well; 
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you wish, make a closed cane, and the instrument is full to purge the head;  
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it has a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid. 
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh comes the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times there arises in the head a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large over time, so much so that it is a fearful thing to behold; 
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then apply the cautery or burning medicine to the spot. 
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays covering it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation: 
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	Do not touch it with iron because it is a festering abscess, for when one covers it even once, great harm comes to the patient; 
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be completely covered, empty the patient and cover it without fear, treating the area with drying and binding agents.  
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh and full of blood; 
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bring the two edges together with stitches, and treat it until it heals. 
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then bring the two edges together with stitches, and remove them, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood and ground incense. 
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way to suture is that you bring the edges together: 
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	either with needles, as we have said in suturing the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have shown you. 
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Within the lips there often appear hard abscesses, resembling grains of millet, some smaller and some larger; 
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn back the lips and cut open each pustule, take them with pincers and remove them in each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the area after the incision with powdered vitriol, until the blood is stemmed. 
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then cover it with linen and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.  
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there arises on the gums swollen flesh which the ancients called "albulus" 
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	it is necessary that you hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run. 
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders on the spot;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. 
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery,
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the shapes of the instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes there are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, crusts that are ugly and rough.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth are black and citron-colored and wormy, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders are in your lap, and hold the bones or the splinters visible, until there remains nothing; 
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and then make the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, until they are cleaned; 
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes that which is at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, one begins again on the second day and the third, until you have raised everything; 
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth need various shapes of instruments for raising, according to what the work shows, for which the rasp with which one raises front teeth has other shapes than those with which one raises between teeth; 
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes and others should be prepared with you. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for this ought not to be done. 
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a very noble substance so that one has no excuse for drawing it out.  
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that is painful.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often the pain deceives the patient, and they think that it is a holy tooth, and have a good tooth drawn. 
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And nevertheless the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have often wanted to do this to these saints. 
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all points, and spit forcefully to keep the gums from all sides. 
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then move it with your two hands or use subtle forceps at the first prick and prick, so that it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the forceps. 
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient rest upon your thigh between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the bone is pierced and gnawed, it is fitting that you fill it with cloths where the holes are; 
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you extract it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break when extracting it;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is very wise to work around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and returns to the patient by the ill will of the root greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like ignorant barbers who by their haste and boldness often break the carriage and do not accomplish what we have recounted; 
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but often bring great illness by the extraction of these roots that remain, or by the carriage they break, as we have often seen; 
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the wound with wine or vinegar and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood flows from it, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place. 
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that doesn't work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments with which one pulls teeth should have long points and thick handles so they do not bend when you pull the tooth. 
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the shapes:  
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large limbs so that they do not bend in the opposite direction, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold the pieces.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after pulling, you must put moistened cotton with butter on the place for one or two days until the gums are softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," whose head resembles a bird's beak.  
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And their inside should be made like a file and this is its shape: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, then you must expose the flesh around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a small plane, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	It must be strong and thick so it does not break, and if the root comes out with these, that is good. 
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments which are in front in the manner of teeth, and of this instrument which appears like large tongs, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of dense material; 
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not so sharp; 
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wisest master craftsmen discover their own instruments according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of others, so that they do not break either the chariot or the other bones, or it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, as I told you, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the form: 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-gripping to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it; 
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, so he has all these instruments: 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to nature, and its form is ugly, even in young women, it is necessary that you know if the density came after the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or smoothed. 
adonques lou raie;	then the rasp. 
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and is made of sharp steel. 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth must be filed little by little every day for its hardness, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a part of a lime like this is the shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And it is also like the file with which one makes needles
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And file the tooth little by little in the hand lightly, so that it does not move until it comes out. 
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the blade in the end should have no scraper, and if the steel is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then file the sharpness until it is smooth so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt speech. 
quant li dent lochent	When a tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth loosens, either by impact or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they are eating without it hurting, and you have treated them with astringent medications, and that does not work; 
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes. 
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the wire and bend it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the ends between the crooked teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the sound tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then begin again the covering until the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move. 
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your bandage be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then grasp the head with a file in tongs, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and fix it so that it does not bite the tongue; 
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it tight as long as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the threads break, remove it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains and serves thus for its entire time, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place again and again, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and at no time make the shape of a cow's bone tooth, and put it in the place where the defect is, and extract it as we have said, and let it remain and serve for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the band of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is this ligament which comes below the tongue or natural, that one is born thus; 
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accident of a stitched wound; 
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the works are such that you open the mouth of the patient and hold his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; 
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then grasp the nervous ligament widely, as long as the tongue is dislodged from its tenement, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is due to stitching of a wound, then he puts in the hook and grasps widely that ligament; 
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and guard that the incision not be too deep, for the artery which is beneath; 
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done so, lift the place with a sharp rose and ice, or with a sharp cold, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; 
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient chew each night, so that the gums may not stick together.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if a flow of blood comes, put ground vitriol on the place; 
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this; 
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then cure it with another remedy until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a scar of black or hard color that the patient does not feel, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; 
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining toward the armpit, and there is moisture, then he cuts the sinew, and makes an incision with a subtle scalpel, and delivers it from one side and the other. 
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood does not come to your work, then put ground vitriol on it until it is quenched, then return to your work until you draw out all the pus; 
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the wound from its place and cleanse it with other remedies until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there come into the throat boils that are called "godaths," and we properly call them the two almonds, and when you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take heed: 
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron at all.  
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it at all with iron, also for the draining of blood. 
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But leave it alone until it is dead, and then you will cut it away, where it would break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of a white color and the root is slender, prepare the instrument to cut, but first look to see if the abscess is quiet and calm. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit facing the sun and let their chest be bare, and open the mouth and take the scalpel between your hands, and press the tongue down below with the instrument. 
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And it should be of silver or fine steel as a knife is:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	While you press the tongue down with this instrument, and see the abscess, take the lancet and insert it into the almond, and draw it forcefully upward as much as you can.  
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and do not touch anything of the cloths with it, then put the cup on the instrument, which is its form, as it seems to have some force; 
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and both the heads are curved and one towards the other, and are very sharp, and are made of tempered iron or steel: 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, take pliers as they are shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it is sharpened on one side, and not on the other.  
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have applied one of the almonds, apply the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, clear and easy, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with warm water, or decoctions of cooked pomegranate seeds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; 
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then let it heal until it is healthy. 
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And if other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, apply them similarly as the two almonds were applied. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, to be exact an abscess of small size; 
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained like that for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that it had to be pierced twice through the two nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore hastened immediately and put in a small incision, then I let the pus out freely, and extracted a large amount of bowel; 
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made another incision in the other opening of the birth, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; 
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	afterwards I put the incision into these abscesses, and cut out a part, and there only came out a small amount of blood; 
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the passage of her throat was opened up for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting from that abscess for a long time; 
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess would grow again, and fill the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; 
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I lanced it and cauterized it inside the throat: 
ensi demora sens croistre;	afterwards it ceased to grow; 
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened after me. 
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the membrane covering the eye descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; 
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is below large and round, it is called "uve". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the inflamed abscess is soothed and subtle, then you must cut it; 
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one which is round and assembled and not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is of a bloody or yellowish or black color, so you must avoid cutting into it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, by its color and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we mentioned before. 
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the cautery into the eye, and draw it underneath, and hold it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.  
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you should not grasp it too forcefully, only the excess that is beyond the natural limit. 
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you grasp more, it will greatly harm the voice and speech. 
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of being cut, it is necessary that you use a remedy to quell their fear during cauterization.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery if it is sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient put his head in healthy ground, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned or the chapter of cauterization, and bind it with sharp, lively thread, so that it is not too thick nor too thin. 
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And in employing the wrapping of this instrument, of which this is the form: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let it have on its head a covering where one puts the medicine, as the coverings of a spoon, and put the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.  
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and make him choke. 
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it soften and the bites of the medicine are calmed. 
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and push the instrument all the way into the cotton in the cane above it, until the cotton catches fire on top. 
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and bind it afterward for four or five days. 
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to moisten the cautery with the medicine again, do so, and after the cautery wipe it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine. 
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be washed with cold water, and let it be treated with gargles until it is healed.  
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; 
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and put water in it, and boil it; 
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot let there be an instrument placed according to this manner: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be made of silver or iron, and let one of its ends be inserted into the patient's eye socket as far as the vapor rises to the eyeball through the tube, until the eyeball is mortified;  
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	then repeat often until the eyeball dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; 
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess.  
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put an egg white inside the head, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; 
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the egg white does not allow the steam to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with health.  
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often a bone or fishbone, or something else, gets stuck in the throat; 
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what you do not see and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; 
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	perhaps if it is extracted by vomiting; 
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of stale bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And tie it to the sponge with thread, then transfer it. 
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it arrives at the place, if it swells, then draw hard.  
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not come easily as we have said, then take the plunging instrument according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised upwards. 
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it should make you unwell, nor push any bone inside. 
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, so that they know where the thing is swollen.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If he pushes it down, then draw hard on the whole instrument equally, until it comes loose.  
de la sansue de la gorge	of the bloodletting of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes medicine is without effect, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines. 
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when this does not profit, then look in the throat of the sick person to the sun, after which you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinus, if it has all little hooks, or use fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a pointed cane, and put it into the patient's throat, then push or drive the end of the cane with a hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And let the patient hold sharp water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full draught of sharp cold water, and work the mouth open, and have it swallowed down, and move it in their hand often. 
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the sickness feels the sharpness, it will cease. 
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not cease as we have said, then fumigate the sick person with asafetida, at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape.  
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall away without delay. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are hot coals, and it be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that hole be placed the head of the instrument. 
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then he inhales the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to the sinuses; 
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And the sinuses will now fall, and if they do not fall, you begin the fumigation many times; 
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty things and such, and does not drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it is necessary that they go out by this treatment.  
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinuses, is, when one can see it, like tongs bent to enter the throat; 
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has the roughness of a file, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go;  
et vez ci la forme:	and see here the form: 
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory brings here after one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; 
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners, one of which is in its appearance itself, and from the moisture it holds.  
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the ulcers when they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses in fleshy areas are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the belly is healed according to its fulfillment; 
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as abscesses which are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints and it is left until it is ripe around, by chance they may corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; 
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or where it is near the fundament, if one pierces it even when it is ripe;  
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not right that you pierce an abscess which is hard without complete digestion, except for the one which is near the fundament, lest it rot thoroughly, and be drawn out inside, and a fistula form; 
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and it may not heal in a long time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its ripening, and it is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; 
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must make the perforation sit where there is the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears to be moving; 
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no weeping. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where they bend, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, its body will be lengthened by the venom within it, and it is full of much filth. 
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And perchance the lips harden and the depth of it. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess which is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you administer small abscesses, small perforations; 
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;  
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to sever the core, and cover; 
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become as yellow as drapery, and is dead, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that one cuts as the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of anger; 
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if it has such things where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, it is fitting that you pierce them completely;  
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is fitting when the abscess is large and has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour but draw out a portion; 
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then open the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing further.  
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times in succession, until all the pus drains out. 
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	In the same way if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying [a child], or small children, or old men debilitated. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes leaps with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound clean, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a clean wound, apply bandages of linen or fine cotton. 
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, you must put a bandage in each one so that they come together. 
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have covered a part of the skin in the abscess and have sewn it around, you must fill it with old cotton or linen tow without moisture and bind it until the third day. 
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone will heal, and the ointment dressing will continue until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold and fresh water, moisten a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the discharge of blood persists, apply dressings and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book to the area, and if it is a time of winter, and the wound or abscess is very sensitive, you must put on bandages and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil; 
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the flesh is fleshy, it behoves that you put wet cloths on it with vinegar and oil, or with wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; 
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then untie the abscess and wipe it and heal it, as is fitting, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is universally known in the treatment of abscesses: 
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.  
des soros	of the shoulders
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head of the shoulder comes small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in webs, just as the jeweler's file of a ring, and many are like it.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and others that have moisture as well as pus; 
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are such that are hard and stony at the waist, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the hip are such that you should try all instruments called "dilator," of which the form comes after this, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, so let it pass over for a long time.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, if you scald without leaving the skin that contains it, because it returns immediately when you leave nothing; 
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; 
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; 
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and do what remains of the night.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin again with cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain for a night; 
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if an abscess is full of thick pus, treat it according to this form for a long time;  
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and apply your ointments and scrape it from all sides, and put all your treatment of milk where it lies; 
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterward. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do for an abscess if it is pierced, and of the waist and of the cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the abscess softens and the moisture, it is lighter for they are drops of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of these were I abscesses that I copied or the head of an old woman; 
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	And I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; 
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had done so, they would have done just as well to make a wound from a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming on the head, those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the lowest part, so that the pus can flow out; 
et les cure si com il covient.	and the cure should be done as is appropriate. 
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs at the neck and below the armpits, and in the angles, and sometimes it comes to other parts of the body, and they are very painful and intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just like the nodule and the abscess on the head, as we have said; 
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the appearances of these scrofula are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are such things that contain moisture, and some that are so bad they will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In the one then that you see of good disposition to touch, and it seems like the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not near the nerves of the neck nor at the artery nor at the duct, and is not deep; 
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	it is fitting that you cut it above, and scrape it from each part, and extend the two edges of the heart to ointments, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel not be too sharp nor cutting, so the hand does not slip, and do not go too far ahead lest you cut what you should not.  
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut a vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put into the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that staunch blood, and draw out the wound; 
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And let it remain until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood has been drawn off, you may return to your work until you have completed it; 
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then you must be sure with your index finger whether there remain any small scrofulous ulcers, and if so, clean them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if it has in the root of the scrofulous ulcer a large vein, you must not cut that scrofulous ulcer at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off by itself without harm. 
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you scrape away the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you know how to cut the root of it, and draw firmly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulous ulcers which retain superfluity, pierce them where it appears dead;  
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce them as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then apply tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment promoting healing flesh until it is healed. 
de squinance	Of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; 
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut out; 
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one should not help him by this means, for all the veins and the throat of the sick person are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the throat, it is fitting to lift the epiglottis to avoid the peril that comes from choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below III or IV circles a small incision across, between the II circles or according to the quantity of the incision of the pharynx, not in the cartilage; 
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those are suitable for cutting the epiglottis because there is no cartilage and the vessels are long. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all the edges, then splits the heart until it reaches the sternum. 
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the symphysis, as we have said; 
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm from the sternum which flows out through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice. 
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open a while. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all alone without the cartilage. 
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that produce flesh, until it is healed. 
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely torn open and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is apparent.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; 
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, until it was cleansed; 
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; 
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead as can be. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found the blood which had flowed out of it, and although it had not opened a vein nor run any further than the throat, the veins were ruptured by the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and cleansed it until it was healed;  
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it did not happen to the damsel that she was red of voice, and she returned afterward to her disposition; 
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a yellow hue, and it is very common in women; 
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two ways: 
naturez, et accidens;	by nature, and by accident;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	where the natural one has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, of which one is similar to thick phlegm, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our arteries; 
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there should be fear, and it is not fitting to work with fire except in those that are small, and prove and search all the way through: 
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as we found ours, and it cannot be opened to any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts the nails, and treat the hair with all its down, if there is any. 
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And enclose it well from the beginning, and care for it as is fitting until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of warts
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways known to us, of which I will speak of all the resemblances; 
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I say all the difference that is between nail and issue.  
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that an issue is hot and feverish, as long as the boiling is not passed, and the corruption is completed. 
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and heat subside. 
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a nail there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and it begins just as a pimple, and grows large. 
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two appearances, either greasy or moist, and their color is as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new wound, that you examine and inquire first with all the instrument which is called "introductory" according to what its form will be or the chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses of us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess.  
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the intruder, and take care in case it springs out. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs, whatever color it may have, do as I have said for the other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the intruder no moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so do it then in a cross shape and take it with pincers, and lightly scratch it on each side and watch the coat where it lies so you draw it out cleanly with the new. 
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, do so piece by piece so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the pain will return many times. 
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if a small piece remains and does not bother him, apply the wound with some strong corrosive powders, cleanse the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed. 
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the pain is great, sew the two edges of the wound together and treat it with what promotes flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the pulsating vein is against you or something else hastens you, apply powdered vitriol to the place and leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and relieves the boiling of blood. 
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to cauterize what remains in the pain.  
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of instruments for insertion, and they are of three kinds: 
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small; 
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three square ones which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: 
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews charms, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those which are yellow are worth more, and are better proven for black lead to encircle the curves of fistula; 
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the lancets are very similar as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small; 
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if it has two curves in three ways also; 
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if it has three curves, and are also of three ways;  
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if it has two curves, and those with one curve only, and are of three ways; 
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these are what they do with sharpening, and some of those that cut only from one side are used for scraping, so that we don't cut the vein or nerve. 
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these instruments are the lancets set in handles, so that the patient doesn't feel it when opening abscesses. 
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three ways:  
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Great, small, and medium, as you see; 
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And do not use any but in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places; 
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And never make another instrument small, resembling the husks of walnuts, according to this form, with which one staunchs blood: 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back in place which heals by cutting veins and arteries
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they appear like women's breasts; 
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them, if it is necessary, should proceed according to this form from line .b. to line .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; 
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if her breast hangs down, and is softened by its size as it often happens to women, then make two cuts on the breastbone, through two similar incisions. 
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is joined to the other at the end of one and the beginning of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; 
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then flay the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for healing, until it is healed; 
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or because of bleeding, then you should fill the wound with softened cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; 
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it until it softens the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come below the armpits are hard kinds of scrofula where there are ribs and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and treat it with an ointment suitable for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then make it like we have said in making incisions for scrofula, and if the wound goes inward, apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the breaking of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut and the skin above it is sewn, many times abscesses occur, and the same thing happens to the swollen vein and abscess. 
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the one who knows cuts when it is for the artery, the abscesses are long and perfect. 
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense the separation.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for a vein, the bones are seen to be further apart. 
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles and neck and many other places, and it is very large.  
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure with iron, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and on the one who has a swelling from an artery running under the skin for a long time. 
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work the incision as directed with one-inch marks, and cleanly separate the artery from the surrounding tissues until it is exposed. 
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle beneath it and pass it through to the other side, and extract the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples. 
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then cauterize the area between the two ligatures with an intro Mitter until all the blood has been released and the abscess is drained. 
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply a bandage that promotes healing, as long as the ligatures hold.  
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then dress this with an appropriate ointment until it is healed. 
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is at the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold onto what you can grasp from the abscess to all the surrounding skin, then insert a needle beneath the area that you are holding and pass it through, using a doubled thread so that you draw it out on the other side.  
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I told you, with a thread from one of its two sides to the other.  
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread will come loose, put another needle through all of the thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four parts. 
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the heart and leave that which is tied. 
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a cloth softened in wine and oil on top, then give him care of bandages and ointments until he is healed.  
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, abscesses also come to nerves when they are overworked, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in the shoulders and arms and in all their places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several conditions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is removed formed, the patient feels pain, and it is not perfectly matched to the body, but below the heart. 
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves well in all directions and does not go forward nor backward, nor below nor above; and the one that is in the joints should not be covered by iron. 
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	For fear it might contract.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And if it is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.  
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, take some tweezers and grasp them at their root. 
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it to the lancet and flay it, then the surgeon and bind the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of large bogeys hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it happens in the bowels and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance like mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and thick heads. 
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are small ones and very large ones. 
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and they had small roots, and they were easily cut, and moisture continually flowed from them. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six.  And when performing surgery, if you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has fine roots; 
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the incision is made wide, and there are fire cauteries present.  
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at the hip there often comes excessive bleeding, and if the blood goes too fast, then hurry and cauterize it. 
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to pull the thread of linen until it catches the artery, and flows through by its labor. 
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are thick, it is feared to cut them immediately because of the belly, but you can well cut half of it and then cauterize it so that it does not grow back. 
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of a fox color, poor in feeling, and milk-like in appearance.  
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the arm is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a boil comes from cautery of a wound or a fissure in the flesh, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is present, or from windiness; 
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the flesh and by the issue of the bowels, then the color of the abscess appears like the color of the body, and it is a light matter without pain, and it opens from different issues. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when one presses on its sides it springs back, and then returns, and by chance if it is tightened, it greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through hard labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but do not constrict it. 
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it opens with these signs: large and hard abscesses, and fixed according to a certain quantity. 
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is fitting that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold his breath and be stretched out straight, then grasp all around the elbow. 
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have grasped with all of the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the whole large one. 
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the knot be loose. 
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on half of the abscess extended above the ligature, and push your index finger in and grab the intestines; 
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the ligature, loosen it and push the intestine out of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find pus, grasp it with forceps and cut away the excess. 
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if an artery or vein opposes you, bind it well then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and push the two needles around what you have already done so that they pierce through. 
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see pus, remove the needles and leave the ligatures until they rot and let the dead flesh come off by itself. 
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then the care of what suits it, and open the abscess as we have said; 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area with what suits it, and suture the area. 
dou chancre	about a sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the likenesses of a chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron; 
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say that the chancre spreads into the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and they said the ancients that when a chancre is in a place where it can be scraped, such as a chancre which is on the breasts, and on the thighs, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in the beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it is not suitable that you approach it, for I can never cure any. 
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever healed without me before. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the works, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient of black bile once; 
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work; 
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then gather your ointments or poultices, and hair from all sides, and bone from all sides without leaving anything out;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood run freely, and wipe the area with your hand or some other thing, and if the flow of blood prevents you from cutting the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stemmed. 
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with another cure until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron:
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only cracked; 
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch it with iron in these two cases: 
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and ileus, for it is a deadly thing; 
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore when you treat this kind of dropsy which is called "cracked" with medicine and the treatment does not help, consider whether the patient is weak or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things; 
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is of strong constitution and he has only dropsy and is not too young nor too old, then you must proceed as follows: 
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lay the patient straight on your hands, and have the attendants press the belly by pushing the point at the lowest part below the hip, then take the sharp pointed spatula in this manner:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	At a point, and however it is not so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot be broken. 
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if dropsy is drawn towards the intestines: 
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If it is necessary that you cleave within the bowels, three fingers breadth below on the left side of the buttock.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the bowels, three fingers breadth below. 
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak spot.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it in, and lift your hand on the whole length between the skin and the fascia as far as when scraping to the quantity of a nail or so.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the thighbone until the spatula arrives at the eighth place, and this is the place of the needle, then pull hard, and push this instrument which has this shape: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of iron or brass light, and has at the bottom part a small hole. 
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	And on one side, there are three holes. 
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And two on the other side, and one on the other.  
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which scribes use to cut their pens. 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top there is a handle, so that when the instrument arrives at the point, it now rests on the instrument.  
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Then empty out half or a third part, because if you empty more than is fitting at that time, the patient might die due to the resolution of his spirit from the limb, or his head might become numb, or he might approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the patient's disposition signifies in relation to virtue; and his pulse; 
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held by the heart which pierces the opening that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; 
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the point with a small quantity; 
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and be careful not to press as long as it remains but a prick of a point.  
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient, and leave much of a point there, if the treatment involves burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he drinks; 
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the point, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the suppression of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a hole in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, as soon as he has not pierced all the spatula very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or make a small subtle plug of wool, and bind it and hold it thus for III days or IV and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug so that he may urinate, and then replace it; 
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance it is not necessary, for the urine which comes will not allow it to be closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose opening is small, if it is treated with a clove of garlic, as we have said, it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the opening in its place are unfortunate, for no one is born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; 
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot come up to the bladder, and it is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then they extend the head of the penis and the cap as the size of a quill, so that the urethra hole is in the middle, as it should be; 
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware of the discharge of blood that often comes, and if it happens, let the one who stops blood stop it, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often these boils come on the penis, and they are an unsightly appearance of flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; 
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is necessary that you take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and cleanse all of them, then put moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment on top;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with diachylon ointment until it is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of a foul color and discharging, then it is fitting that you apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have caught it, and if the foreskin is partly on the penis and partly inside the skin, then you must remove the part that is inside first. 
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is joined together, the treatment is outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it all together, unless the head of the penis is surely secured so that it is not pierced, blackness and decay will come to the penis and the groin. 
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and vinegar, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Cauteries assist in two ways together: 
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is to say, in the stopping of blood, and in counteracting corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupt and retracted, it is necessary that you draw or insert a cane of lead into the penis and have the patient urinate. 
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hairs grow around the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether it is due to a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scorch it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides. 
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a difficult thing to do, it is necessary that you scorch it with a spatula at several points around the head of the penis and the skin. 
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then carefully separate them, and apply a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water so that it does not burn again. 
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a loosening of continuity like other wounds; 
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Whenever we perform this work of our own volition, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for their safety. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want the greater part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions used to do it with a sharp knife, with force, and with all their might. 
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	This would split the heart because there are two membranes, and by chance if one cuts this one above it remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Here it is necessary to cut, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is of the two membranes, the point of the member is not reliably secure.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And at the cleansing of the one membrane, by chance the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times they are born so that they do not need cleansing and I want it so. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	About the modification which is made to all the strength of the thread I have found the goodness of experience for the strengths cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in I all at once; 
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but let the threads be well twisted around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only doing it to tie the thread around his penis, and then comfort him in all ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make it come out straight between your hands, and put the force between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; 
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand on the penis and blow where the heart is, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in; 
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, then tie it below the other ligature; 
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with the second ligature to the scrotum and index finger, and grasp between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly above it and pull the head of the penis; 
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is the cure; 
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on top and on the powder lay a cloth soaked in half an egg yolk cooked with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed. 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces for purification is this: 
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Let the two blades be held and sharp, and let the blades also be as large as the handle equally:  
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of purification is when the heart flees within the incision; 
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore it is fitting that you extend it to your fingernail, just as the sharp face of an abscess does:  
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And the cup equally, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with tongs, and then hold the cup. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pass three days, and that which is under the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until the abscess below is appeased, and scrape it lightly; 
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If the cup moves as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, for it will not harm anything.  
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore cure the place of things within a wound with powder as we have said in our treatise on powders and if one sews too much and it goes above it will not hurt. 
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cure it as we have said until it is healed.  
dou retenement de l’urine	regarding retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction by stone or congealed blood, or bowel, or flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division. 
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone at the neck of the bladder, it is fitting that the patient be bent on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And let his feet be placed on his back and extend his belly above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can. 
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the neck of the bladder is constricted to expel the stone above so the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with any instrument called a "syringe," which has this form: 
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be of fine silver, light and thin, like the feather of a bird; 
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and the tube should be one and a half palms long, and be fine at the head. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	The method for draining urine is such that you take a doubled thread and tie a piece of wool or cotton to the head, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; 
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a stool, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water; 
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently place the syringe into the penis, as far as it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the buttocks. 
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the one who guides it where it goes is crooked.  
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread all along the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out and let the urine flow. 
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and align the patient.  
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorches or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then make with all the instrument which is called "clepsedre," and it is of this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has 3 openings: 
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side and one on the other, as you see. 
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the veins are cut so that the medicinal court is such that it cauterizes the penis well without additional pain, if one can draw out the moisture and inject when necessary.  
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines settle in the bladder, put the head of the cautery into the moisture and draw it out with the instrument that is within. 
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you draw the moisture to the cautery, and then pull strongly on the instrument within;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	the moisture will enter within and come to the bladder immediately so that the patient will feel it. 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema with which we enema the bladder
si est ci:	this is it: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or boxwood, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below at its side where the linens are tied; 
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see used to enema the bladder in it, then tie it between the two sides with a good strong thread doubled, and heat the tip of this moisture over the fire. 
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the head of the syringe into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder so that all moisture comes out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder. 
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about. 
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like one assembles a bowl, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument. 
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the division the ways of stone and its extraction along with medicine. 
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And we have said the difference between a stone embedded in the reins and all the signs, and which stones one should operate on. 
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you openly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp point of the stone resembles a sharp point in its subtlety; 
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it opens the urethra and scratches the patient's penis, and bends it many times, and then stiffens; 
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and many of these points dissolve.  
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And the healing is light for children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is in the middle for those who are between adolescence and old age; 
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.  
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, to draw out all the phlegm that is in the bowels.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it hinders sometimes to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and push them down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from there. 
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make him sit between your hands evenly balanced, and let his hands be below his thighs so that his bladder is entirely inclined downwards. 
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then grasp it and press it inside. 
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now and cut above the stone.  
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not budge at all when touched, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger if the patient is a young man who is fully grown. 
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	Insert it into its base and grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bind it at the neck of the bladder. 
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press on top of your finger, and insert it at the opening where you see you must cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand and command him to extend his right hand upward with the testicles, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where you are making the incision.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he inserts the spatula, cutting, with this form: 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And he makes an incision between the buttocks and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; 
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it shall be straight upon the stone, and your two hands shall be right there by the fundament, and the waist shall be made so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; 
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the press with the hands which are by the fundament shall jump out without work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there are some stones which have angles and margins: 
si est griés a issir;	if it is grated to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there are some which are underneath, resembling a lentil, and round, from which the issue is easy. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore when there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; 
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not come out, you must pull it out with tongs that are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape. 
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	Or you insert a subtle instrument bent at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you cannot bring it out this way, widen the hole a bit, and if the sinew is cut, remove it with vitriol. 
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one stones, insert the largest one first into the neck of the bladder, then those above it, and treat them forcefully; then the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.  
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be sewn, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient: 
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	Either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because the veins cannot bind. 
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless force yourself to pull it out, or to break it up with pincers, so that you pull it out piece by piece. 
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; 
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then bind the patient under his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if it rises very well in the place of oil and water, then cure it with ointment diafynacon and ointment basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained by it, which is known in part that without straining with the urine: 
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore apply a poultice to the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and rot it; 
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then raise the wound with a needle and thread, and help it in all ways that you know until it is healed. 
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medicines on the site. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small and it is lodged in the urethra and stuck so that urine cannot pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the cure I have just described is performed many times, one can be excused from cutting due to this treatment. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this shape and fix it at three angles in the fire:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then carefully insert the borer into the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the borer in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone through to the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed; 
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for anything that prevents it, tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then cut the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then extract it, untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It can happen that a stone is lodged in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three things: 
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and who will reveal herself to the doctor, even when she is chaste. 
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is such that by chance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands; 
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels you to this, it behoves you to take a midwife well-knowing, and with difficulty one finds her, and if you do not find her, then you should use a sharp, subtle knife; 
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present a midwife well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her regarding the inquiry into the stone; 
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very closely whether the woman is a virgin: 
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it behoves you to put your finger or thumb on her fundament and seek the stone;  
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she should constrain it below her finger, and instruct her to push her finger where the patient is, and want and press her left hand on the bladder. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it quickly from the entrance of the bladder down below, as far as it reaches the root of the thigh; 
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then put it on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is moved together, and feel the stone in that part; 
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and let the size be small at first;  
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then put the knife in the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of stones: 
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	These are to know, small and large, sharp and dull, long and round, and those that have barbs. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the arrowhead remains, put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the arrowhead is extinguished; 
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, as long as the stone is strong, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work; 
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the arrowhead remains and it is from an artery that has been cut, put powder on the site and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not touch it anymore, leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest the patient should die by chance. 
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the flesh tightens, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	The watery substance is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white phlegm, which is below the heart of the testicles, and which contains the seed.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "syfac", and never properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg. 
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And it is the skin from which the white syfac comes as we have said. 
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And this did not happen by chance. 
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from striking the testicles, and this moisture has many colors:  
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	it is yellowish, or without red, or black, or white watery, and more happens. 
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is white syfac as we have said, it is the boil of the testicles; the pain lasts as long as the shape of an egg and does not open the testicles because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the web itself, it is a boil of the testicles with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg. 
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sinew, then he will feel it well. 
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, test all the instruments which are used for insertion beforehand, as its shape was before.  
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this which comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it is fitting that the patient be cleansed according to our ability and the repletion of his body; 
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lay him on his back, upon something a bit high, and put a lot of cloths under him;  
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the instrument toward one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles; 
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the sharp spatula and cut the skin of the testicles along their length down to the pointy end, and make your incision perfectly straight by dividing the skin of the testicles up to the white sinew, and delicately scrape it according to your ability; 
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the syfac full of sharp points at a large hole, and extract all the sharp points, and then put your ointments, and extend the syfac upwards; 
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the cones, but only the syfac alone; 
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut all or by pieces immediately the side of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return sharp. 
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg leaps from your work, so reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syfac; 
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two leaves of the heart of the cones with a stitch, then heal it as the other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the outflow of blood. 
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the scrotum with all its suspensory ligament, and extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the pointed object is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and place in the wound linen soaked in rose oil; 
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And place another linen soaked in wine and oil, and put it on the two testicles, and put double cloths on top, and tie it all with a bandage according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and fill them with shredded linen according to this appearance and let them be assembled by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one side takes on the fundament up to the back, and the other at the part of the groin; 
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and let all the assembly be gathered in the loop of the arm; 
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And it is never medicine this branch of cautery in place of iron cutting, and it is that you take the cautery knife subtle, and peel the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white fascia containing the sharp point is uncovered; 
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that fascia with it, and scald it with this subtle hot cautery:  
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And the peel in all the ways that you can, as long as you uproot everything; 
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; 
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is safer;  
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and watch out for the outflow of blood, and it is better than the works of cutting. 
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything opposes you, whether an abscess, discharge of blood, or something else, treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I tell you, and know that when you are well-assured by the signs we have mentioned that the watery humor is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; 
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess at the bottom part, as wide as a span, and make the perforation as long as the body; 
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the opening be wide so that all the pus can flow out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the spot and bind it, and let it stay to drain the remaining pus, then treat it until the wound is healed; 
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not let the humor escape into the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument with which one treats the humor of dropsy in it, its form being as shown before; 
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound a bit, and know that the humor will return and gather again after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, then the patient will spend his days like that. 
de l’aposteme des coions	from a boil on the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this branch, fear has many dispositions, for which it seems to me better to leave it. 
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and the resemblances of an abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, and likewise on the testicles;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is by many causes.  
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by excessive sourness and sharpness, which is spread to the joints, or from percussion. 
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; 
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And find no pain, and it is an abscess of sorrow. 
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there are abscesses grievously porous and pierced, and of a dark color, and sometimes it comes from the new growth of an artery, or swelling of a vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from the new growth of an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. 
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not fitting that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made from swelling of the vein is known by its disposition at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this type, and on the other types.  
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then lift up the egg, and pull out the cord from white fat, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all sides of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already dried with these fresh charcoals, then it is fitting that you pull out the egg and cut it. 
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is adhered to the fat, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is fitting that you deliver all of that tendon, and cut it roundly. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is behind or further back, it is fitting that you cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	from a boil on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in an envelope resembling a burr, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans when he goes. 
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this disease is as dangerous and difficult as this one before it, nevertheless we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is fitting that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then you put the suspensory of the testicles down to your thighs, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and bind them tightly, and extend them. 
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with a sharp scalpel in a wide place so that the vessels are exposed, and then flay on each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples; 
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first place where the vein appeared and tie it securely to the other end.  
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them straight down the middle according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted humors.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then dress the wound as other wounds where one injures bowels so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the testicles. 
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for through this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels are seen, then it is fitting to draw the veins of all the vessels; 
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the bone does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped. 
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the bone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrence of this branch is through the section that comes or arises, or the extension on the belly in the part of the intestines, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the veins; 
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either at the symphysis or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from much of the same causes: 
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	either by percussion, or by a jump, or by a struggle, or by lifting something too heavy, and by similar things; 
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the symphysis are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; 
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are equalized until towards the end, so that the pus hastens the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the gut, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are various abscesses appearing underneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body being outside the gut.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never pull out the intestines with the hernia, and it is held back there, and causes great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, because of fear, one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is such that you instruct the patient to knead the intestines with his hand inside the wound if he can enter. 
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then let it be rubbed on his neck between your hands and lift the thighs.  
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch the heart above and cover all the skin of the testicles from length. 
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then put inside the folds of the waist a knife according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bones can come out.  
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then flay the pus that is under the skin of the testicles until the white pus hard is uncovered from all sides. 
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then put your index finger in that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white pus that is under the skin of the egg, and between the second pus, and part that which is behind the egg, and between the second pus.  
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then place your right hand inside the patient's buttocks
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to extend the egg upward, and untie what is aired behind the ligature; 
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and inquire at your leisure if there is any intestine wrapped around or white sinew hard, and if you find nothing, put the end in the belly below; 
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a large thread made of ten threads, and put it in the back part near the sinew, which is after the skin of the testicles; 
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waistline, then cut the flesh that appears from the threads, as long as there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one upon the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the sinew, of which we have said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of two parts; 
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the flesh around the threads and tie them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter within, so that no abscess may come there. 
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put a second bandage over the first, twice as long as it, and after these two bandages leave two fingers' breadth below the heart of the groin. 
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries.  
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then bind in the part which is below the skin of the groin as long as the sinews and bowels are bound, as we have said before. 
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wool softened in oil to the wounds and bind it with the bandage we have described.  
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never are the white sinews cauterized as we have said, after the incision, for fear of stopping the flow of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often and leave the bandage on until it oozes through it; 
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is slow to drain, raise it with hot water and place it on top of what we have said until it drains. 
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another dressing until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is together with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision on the thigh slightly below. 
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then sew it to me, and heal the abscess of he who works, as long as the vessels weep;  
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heal it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes rupture comes in anger, as we have said, and open the veins;  
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not draw out any of the intestines like onions, and if some are drawn out, it is bad, and repair every hour; 
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and nevertheless if it remains too long in this place, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestines are drawn out; 
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the fistula which is at the anger, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swells the veins and opens them; 
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and its treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; 
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is sometimes cured with iron in this manner: 
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the patient lies frequently on his back between your hands, then cover the place of the rupture swollen about three widths; 
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then pull out the sinew which is below the skin than usual, then take a red-hot iron and place it on the exposed sinew spot; 
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press down to the deepest part of the belly, then cauter the two spots exposed by the sinew on the top of the iron and cauter one and the other; 
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then remove the top of the iron, and do not cover the sinew nor extend the wound or anything else, as I have shown you in the cure of a rupture of the intestines; 
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then cure it with the cure of wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, let the patient cleanse and care for the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is constricted, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauteries are milder in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it is made to be seen. 
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back and cuts away the softened skin onto the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring the two edges together with one stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the stitches and cure it like the other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread. 
dou chastrement	Through chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of it in this book. 
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary only in two ways: 
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the patient in his reason responds when asked, and knows the treatment; 
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castration is done according to two methods:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by incision. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until the testicles are softened and hanging; 
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are withdrawn and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille:	Of castration of the tail:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut above each testicle one cut, when you have well skinned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	And he leaves no mark or subtle mark which is on the vessels; 
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction there may remain by chance some parts of the testicles, by which the beast desires lust. 
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is healed.  
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways for men: 
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is that between the two testicles there appears also a shape like that of a woman's nature, or it may have hair, and sometimes urine flows into it.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is for women, and it has on the belly like a rod and two horns.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut off all the added parts and treat them like other wounds; 
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, of men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.  
de la tentigene	Of the tendon
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A splint is a piece of wood added to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; 
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. 
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you hold the excess of the splint in your hand or at your elbows, and bind it lightly; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not bind too tightly, so that blood does not flow, then treat with another treatment until it is healed; 
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another splint that grows at the mouth of the marrow and the bone, and by chance jumps out, and according to its appearance it is like a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cupping it as we have said the tenting, and heal it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of wandering
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or if the opening is small; 
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it is natural by birth, or accidental through illness that it has come. 
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is by chariot added, or through subtle force or hope, and it is made perfect in the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be. 
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And they differ in conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers.  
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the knowledge of these is through the gaze of the bailiff. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the splinters are near and visible, whether on the left or right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is through subtle force, and it is close to two leaves, if you hurry, they will come thus. 
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then extend the two leaves until the subtle force is gone, and the swellings are over. 
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman stay at home each day so that she cannot solder. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the synovial membrane is hard and thick, it behoves you to cut it with a scalpel resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the splinter is of oak wood, then suspend it at the onion and the copper. 
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have the medicines steeped in blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, all together with egg yolk. 
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a leaden cane wide enough so that the wound cannot close up. 
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And thus for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen.  
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it should be cured with other remedies until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a boil comes with flesh, if it suits to cover according to this manner, except for ulcerated abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an inflamed abscess in the marrow, one must not use fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard. 
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the division the resemblances of others, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and fissures when they are completely embedded in the anus, and do not appear to the touch, unless they are cauterized by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the ulcer, one can feel, are those one can cleanse.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the hemorrhoid with tongs and copper on its roots, then sprinkle powder of blood-stopping medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; 
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then put its feet to the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water. 
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood flow comes, then place it in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on its back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it goes out, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, apply cupping to its back and breasts without injury. 
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so cover it as I said for the thelul. 
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then cure it until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the sea
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the sea, such as ulcers and piercing abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes to the marrow, which is not among the abscesses which they call boils; 
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.  
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it mature until the pain is eased; 
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring together his feet at the farthest part from the leg; 
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; 
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then suck the jawbone towards the left side, and bring the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the wound, from which the form will then come.  
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see this instrument administered, you insert the point first to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters the instrument does not go any deeper than it should and does not injure the patient. 
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not injure it. 
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary that he put the funnel of the instrument above and hold the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with the hand soft, then if it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the spatula left.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowel is emptied, it is fitting that you put into the wound tents softened in oil of roses, or in oil of green vitriol. 
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tent firmly from the wound to the edge of the marrow, and put by outside on the marrow and on the point wool clean softened in water where agrimony or mullein are cooked; 
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure afterwards every two days with ointment suitable to this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and at no time raise the marrow and the wound by an enema of water and honey, and then of water or long roots of lily and birthwort are cooked; 
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the marsh, it is necessary that you refrain from using a hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the form of natural childbirth, and the signs if it be so when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell vinegar: 
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then hasten to let the child's breath out; 
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then know that such a birth is according to natural form, and the issue is below its head, and the second twin with it; 
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is fitting to press its belly lightly so that the child issues quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when it descends upon its head, then the second twin comes with it, and the mother is delivered of her superfluities by good purification; 
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.  
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and the body or the head and hands come first, or it comes upon its belly, or often, and is turned by chance out of its neck, and by other bad figures;  
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out on its own through natural birth, and the woman gives birth easily, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle where women hold her. 
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And let oil or fenugreek be cooked according to its nature, and then put the ball between her thighs the small spatula of which is this shape: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And split the second fingernail, and scrape at its corner until the moisture that is within runs out;  
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman a clyster of fenugreek mush with sesame oil; 
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then have her take and sneeze repeatedly, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If the child is now delivered. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out fully, then you must reset them lightly bit by bit; 
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat and raise her feet. 
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then raise the seat from the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when it is raised. 
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her hands cannot enter and the child is dead, cut her hands with a knife that has been placed beforehand and extract the child and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, it must be pushed upward; 
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it back and forth until it is equal.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take it by the feet and extend it back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up to its thighs, command it to grasp and make it sneeze from being restrained. 
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps further, may God will it. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come strong as we have said, take a mixture of hawkweed, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar. 
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And put it on the nature of the woman inside and heat this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to below the ribs. 
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is softened underneath, make a plaster of myrrh for her and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour. 
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the infant will now leap. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands on it bit by bit;  
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be careful and hang him by his neck, and let his feet dangle down, and let him lie on the bed. 
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold her hands little by little, then take her hands upon the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until she is exposed below; 
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if her child does not jump, then he takes her feet and moves them upwards, then he moves the belly up, then he puts his hands in; 
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and draws out the child little by little;  
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instructs the woman to hold still until her child emerges. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the delivery of a child who comes forth with one hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot return it, then make the woman stand up and walk; 
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and unbend her legs upwards;  
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the poultice that I have described; 
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then study to return the hand;  
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And take the child according to its natural form and make it sneeze, and command her to hold herself as long as the child remains still. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the delivery of the child upon its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is fitting that the healer has their hand, then turns it a little at a time, and takes it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is equal, put on the natural muscle oil and oil, as we have said, then command her to move a little at a time; 
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and command her to hold herself; 
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the second
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes strong in this manner throughout the entire second joint, grasp the second joint with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained; 
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child can lean on its face and neck, grasp it from below, so that it is not held back, and the child dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child inside as long as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman not to move at all: 
adonques si istra legierement.	then if she moves slightly. 
de l’issue des gemelz	from the removal of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born: 
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it does happen.  
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing and do not live if they are named: 
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they be multiplied and are delivered by the suture which divides them, which is tied to the belly button: 
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they are also born naturally as one under all, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are born in a difficult way, the care is as we have said, and let the midwife be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does: 
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is necessary for salvation. 
de plusors enfans	of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or several up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen; 
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if you do according to what is necessary. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands; 
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is fitting that you know whether the woman is of sound constitution, and does not have an accident or fear of death; 
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is fitting that the woman be placed on her back, with her shoulders inclined downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife takes hold of it in two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated until the child is delivered; 
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the womb with wet oils mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek seed and linseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures; 
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently insert them into the womb, then wants the place where she inserts the fingers to be convenient for this, and take care that if the infant is attached it descends on its head; 
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if she inserts her fingers into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or into the nape of the neck or near the ribs, and if the descent is on its feet, she inserts them at the hip and middle ribs;  
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that she holds the finger in her right hand, and puts the curve between her fingers of the left hand, and inserts it with all her hand gently, and inserts the finger into any of these places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty thing; 
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the lancet: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert against the other lancet, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then extend them equally by moving back and forth, to make it come out, and let the lancets have teeth to hold it, as the shape is like this: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, anoint the base with some of its oil, and put them in that part, and draw out the other part. 
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if none remains, put this lancet or higher up, and do this until it all comes out. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes forward over the other and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then it is fitting that you wrap a cloth around it until it all rises.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then apply the cup to the joint of the foot or at the knife's edge, and so you must do with the other hand, and for both feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at birth, or if it has a sharp point assembled, you must put the splintered spatula between your fingers and cut the point and extract it. 
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will return it to the instrument which is called "almidach," of which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.  
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And in the same way do so if the infant has a large head naturally; 
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then draw the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is extracted forcefully, it should be split, so much that the moisture which is in the bad delivery is removed. 
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as small as you can. 
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, it must be pierced so that the moisture runs out. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the straightening at the mouth of the uterus is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is embedded in the belly or the breast, it must be extracted wrapped in a cloth upon the hand; 
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and pierce the belly or the breast, so that the moisture within runs out; 
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are removed and the head remains, put the hand of the patient into a pot of warm water, and pull it up to the mouth of the pot. 
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then put in one or two ounces, and boil it hard; 
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the pot is constricted due to a hot boil that has come, then it is not right to work on it, but rather administer moist and fatty things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And let the dispenser apply plasters, which are soothing and moistening. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, apply what we have said in the living child; 
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is no way, cut the flesh into pieces and leave nothing of the afterbirth.  
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said for abscesses that come in the marsh; 
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, apply a strong astringent bandage and administer other remedies.  
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other was also dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a boil came on his arm, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began with great discharge.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled greatly, because it has no bones in its belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I treated the wound and set the bones until the woman was better; 
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I kept the woman like this for a long time, so that there would be just a little swelling in its place;  
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have only recorded this chapter so that when the masters encounter a strange thing they know what to do. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here follows the form of the presser, with which one presses the books. 
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turnings are the heads of the two linen cloths.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more slender than those of the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; 
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the spindle should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and a length of a palm and a half;  
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two linen cloths there should be two adjustments of this same spindle, which are fastened on one side and the other, a half palm in length or a finger more. 
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the press to open when one turns the two horns.  
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more slender and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood spindle, according to the appearance of tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two arms for adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two palms wide. 
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see the vulva open to all instruments, have the woman sit on the bed with her feet dangling and legs open, then insert both arms fitted together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs. 
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the whole instrument as you did with the forceps equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vulva, so that the woman does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all assembled and are multiplied in their likenesses. 
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when she sees them matched, the work is all the more hasty, and higher are men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze deliberately, and remove your hands from her mouth and nose; 
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it comes out that way, all is well.  
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make a hole or lid in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea and centaury; 
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot with water over the fire; 
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cane or tube in the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the womb, and let it steam until the vapors enter the womb; 
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make her sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second bone leaps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not strong, command the patient to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or mallow poultice, and then plunge it into the wound, and hold it there for a while. 
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, grasp and extend it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not break during extraction. 
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But you must move it slightly to the right and left, and then draw it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	It will come and loosen. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the opening of the marrow is constricted, we have said the cure is sneezing and fumigation with herbs. 
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not from all of this which we have said, be careful that you do not pull against the grain.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is fitting that what is at the opening of the marrow, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then apply an enema with tetrapharmac ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if he carries it and puts it back, and will come strong; 
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but all the same, when it is carried so it comes with bad smell to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So therefore proper fumigations are needed for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have proven fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and her secundines is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it seems like a reed, and one puts the subtle head in its nature, and the heads wide on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the scab as long as it is gone, and start another.  
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather have a subtle tool: 
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that tool with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard against touching the opening.  
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put it on linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay in place, insert or put a cane of wood and leave it for three days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into its chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this inflammation comes from the suppuration of a wound or abscess; 
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover that suppuration: 
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If it is healed as we have said of the cane of a plum tree. 
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come below the buttocks are nodules and swellings that come from beneath the buttocks or in the space between the two parts, whether it is one fistula or several; 
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that nodule is old, if it works and still gives off white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; 
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by the fact that there is either discharge or flatulence when the patient has a bowel movement, and perhaps one jumps out. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and to half of the penis; 
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach the junction of the thigh, and to the knee. 
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula penetrating the fundament, and not penetrating.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you stick your index finger or the fundament, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is tortuosity, then you insert a tent of fine silk thread, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger. 
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus, flatulence, or worms as we have said. 
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	Know that it does not penetrate.
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends as far as the bladder or as far as the urine channel, then if the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced as far as the joint of the thigh, so the attempt comes as far as the place. 
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no crookedness and the invention of pain turns inward, so it is that he will go there now, and no medicine or ointment by application is worth.  
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except toil, and vanity of foolish sights that interpose themselves. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is not persistent and is not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back. 
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and puts his thighs inclined toward his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then put in a tent of iron, or lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tent comes. 
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the base, it is fitting that you put your index finger there, and if you then feel that the tendon has been pierced; 
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and whether it is uncovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or flesh, then know that it has been pierced. 
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there is no work to be done on it, it cannot be healed.  
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that one can heal anyone well, but this happens rarely 
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that is done, if it is heated according to the width of the fistula as it has been said before. 
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And put the whole hot cautery into the fistula, as long as it comes out at the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times until you know that these faulty flesh are burned, which resemble a bird's feather. 
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then the cure of softened tents with butter until that which burns is extinguished, then the cure of ointment spreading and healing. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed like this, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it cannot otherwise be healed; 
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent enters and does not pierce through to the bone which is at its foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula under that which covers the core;  
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the opening of the beginning of the fistula is found and pushed forward before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent;  
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the tent will be delivered and will fall away. 
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then cleanse those charred parts which resemble a bird's feather and leave none remaining. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood comes, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For fire cautery accomplishes two things: 
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	This is to know, the cautery of these added meats, and the suppression of blood and the drying of moisture. 
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of softened tents in butter or in crushed hazelnuts, as long as the embers burn well, and it becomes stronger when the meats are burned in the bowels. 
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with ointments of boiled dried herbs.  
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the foundation and is far from the body, it should be treated with a poultice or foundation, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent and between II is the cloth or the silk or meat, where it is about to pierce, if there are no other ways of faith and hope except through the administration of one of the III manners: 
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and treat them as first.  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep so that you do not cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come through the intentional sense. 
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the cure, as we have said; 
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it once it is cut away from the base, either by hand or by another pointed instrument; 
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse that corrupted flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;  
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part behind the base: 
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it were a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And fistulas are never made in this manner: 
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is near or touches the base under the skin above, then take a tent pierced at its head according to this form:  
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bend the thread twice, and put the tent on all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is passed through the edge of the base inside, then pull out the thread from that pierced spot, so that you put your finger or thumb in the base; 
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and treat the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and separate one from the other, and leave it for one or two days; 
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it several times, until the thread catches these bars that are between the two, and they click; 
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is closed and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, make it pierce through all the ways that you can, as long as it is not too constricted.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to treat for placement or covering with a bandage so perfectly, and then cure as we have said, until it be healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the pointed spatula with which you make a fistula must be very sharp on one side and cutting;  
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side not sharp, so that you don't cut what you shouldn't cut, as you see here: 
des emorroydes	Of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways: 
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are inside the buttocks, like grains of rosin, and there are small ones and large ones, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude from the buttocks and at the top of the buttocks;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are heated have a little moisture, and still again or a little bit of sharp citrus or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body. 
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them in the foundation, it is as if you instruct the patient to stretch himself out so as to go into chambers until the foundations dry up and the threads appear; 
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and can grasp it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.  
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with linen, or cotton, or a piece of chamois. 
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And pull them out at your leisure, then cut them off and sprinkle some hot powders that are in place of a cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other remedies until he is healed. 
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then give the patient a harsh and pungent enema to cleanse what is in the foundation so that it may come out openly. 
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the patient can be pressed, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.  
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you take them with your fingernail or forceps and cut them off, then treat it as we have said until it is healed, and he fears the incision by iron.  
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary that you administer a suture according to this manner: 
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and it should be wide. 
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	Pull the thread tight, then tie a knot in the thread and remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, and leave one to drain off excess blood.  
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put on the bandage softened in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. 
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then leave it until it heals, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until it is healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	for the drying of wounds or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there occurs drying up of the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you hold the tip of a spatula or your fingernail on top of it so as not to let it get wet. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it is healed as needed. 
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, shave it again more forcefully than before until it heals completely and is scraped. 
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	Where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A boil is a small faulty appearance near the body, and it spreads quickly.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes you find the cold there, and one feels it also like a deathly shiver, and it comes throughout the body, and most of all in the hands than anywhere else. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the remedy is that you take a cane from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that cane upon the shiver, until the circles completely encircle the shiver; 
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all the way around the cane until you encompass the whole shiver, and put it in perfectly, and pull the shiver out from its roots.  
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make one of a chain of iron or according to this form, and let it be subtle below and sharp above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, but hold on to the pain, and press. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, cauterize the shiver, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.  
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes one makes an enema of silver or artichoke, or melted iron or malleable iron; 
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And at no time are these instruments made small or large, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then who minister to children in their care and are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is wide on top, where the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a separation where the stomach is tied as you see it and the flesh is pierced inside.  
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And there are two holes on one of the sides and one on the other. 
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And the stomach where one puts medicines is made from a beast's bladder or parchment and pierced all around with small holes, with one finger's width of space between each hole, then threaded through these holes with a thick thread, twisted in an X shape or round about, and the belly is assembled like a goat. 
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then administer an enema.  
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently. 
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then he presses the ministers with his two hands together, until it is all full, then extracts the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it as long as he can; 
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps a whole night like that, it is of greater help.  
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize it for a disease of intestinal flux, and the medicine hastens to enter, then resume until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or an abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child; 
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster where the skin is drawn out:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; 
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We will tell you the cures of hands and of medicine, according to accomplishment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and the cutting of sword and knife, or of spear or of gun or of arrow, or of similar things; 
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; 
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head that are simple, for the remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is from the striking of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: 
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If it bleeds readily from the cephalic vein itself, and only a little blood comes from the wound, and the bleeding is on the opposite side of the injured part; 
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and have the patient abstain from wine and rich foods. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not bleed, reduce their food intake, do not let them drink wine, nor eat meat. 
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place on the wound, if an abscess begins to form, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine. 
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no heat in the abscess, apply to the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding freely, and not moved by air, a powder which I will mention a little later. 
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has been disturbed, apply ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will say for wounds in the belly, about suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and can move, and only holds by a point, then cut it. 
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then dress the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, cut out all the rot thoroughly, and pour strong water over it, then dress it. 
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if it has an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be staunching by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread. 
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does no good, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the dressing is light.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And put this powder on it so that it welds just as if the fire had moved it. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:  
pren encens une partie;	Take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood two parts; 
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Live lime three parts, and powder it subtly, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it burns well and joins with all its blood; 
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; 
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.  
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never is this done with chalk alone, when one does not have incense nor the blood of a dragon, but that the fire has heated the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, put this powder on it immediately; 
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But put some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it runs clear;  
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let him be treated with other treatments until he is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine forceps;  
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about skull fractures later. 
de la plaie dou col	from the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is nerves, there is nothing else to do but leave the treatment alone and not put anything binding on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; 
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their connection with the brain, which is the highest member, 
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be under it, such as chamomile steeped in warm water and mixed with rose oil, and chamomile washed also in warm water, and other mine stones according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, then pierce it lower. 
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then loosen it, tie it off, and cautery is necessary. 
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut or the heart and the conduit that carries the flesh are preserved, then sew the heart onto the bone of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back into its natural shape. 
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then carefully remove it and leave it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed. 
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it. 
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, and if you cannot obtain them, leave them until the wound festers and is cleansed, aligning the opening. 
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, put powder on the powder that I have said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound of lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound has a foul odor that makes the patient faint: 
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then you know the wound is mortal. 
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it because the blood will not flow freely and return to the heart, and kill the patient. 
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day. 
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there will come no spasm, nor bad trembling of heart nor strangeness from elsewhere; 
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good signs, know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it then with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and works, then know that there is a fistula; 
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as it should be.  
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the leg or the back, treat it like those that are in front.  
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, stitch it; 
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone and has broken into pieces, clean the wound, and treat the foreign bodies if they are loose; 
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not weaned, leave the wound to fester, which will lighten the extraction. 
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	of rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great, medium and small; 
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, by which the introduction of others;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one because they put the intestines back in more carefully, if they do not put them back hot against hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and enter more carefully, and for this reason, the medium wound is better because they put back the intestine in its place more easily than the others. 
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners: 
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds. 
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And nevertheless they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and easy things are put back in place, this is done in one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in two ways:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water only, or you boil in hot water squill and cypress and saffron, and rub the intestine until the swelling is gone
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And at no time make this wine restraining, and it is better to have only for drawing out swelling. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with hot or lukewarm water, for by this is opened up the entry to little things; 
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is better than cutting, that no one should cut except in great necessity nor if there is not.  
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the instruments for splitting it: 
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If you cut inside the curve and remove nothing, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you return them to their natural form in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is worth more.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it behoves you to have the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; 
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and breast higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture from the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your mind to this that the injured part be higher than the other. 
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.  
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds put what appears to you, then have between your hands one who has all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; 
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a finger's space, and put in a needle where there is a good strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew and the four together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain a doubled thread onto the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound evenly, and then leave one finger's breadth of space, and insert another needle. 
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie on the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the whole wound is restrained. 
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles pierce all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well.  
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is fitting that they should be medium-sized. 
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And it is not fitting to drive the needles too far beyond the flesh and leather so that they pierce and open the wound before the suture. 
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then bind the sides of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths on the sides of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. 
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two. 
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second suture is common, and it consists of bringing together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the sinew together on one needle with a strong medium thread.  
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all four edges together, pull the needle back to where you started, in the manner that one sews clothes. 
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And leave a space between each stitch the thickness of two grains of barley. 
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This suture heals a man well and I sewed up a wound on a man's stomach or belly, which was cut by a knife and the wound was more than a handspan in size, and the intestines protruded for two handspans, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I put the intestine back in after it had been out for 24 hours and the wound healed up to 15 days, and I treated it, and it was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And those who saw him thought he would die, and it was a miracle. 
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.  
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And I put nothing more on the wound than old cotton twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Here I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:  
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and thread it from the outer part to the inner.   
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the center straight through, take the thread from the tip of the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer.  
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	The understanding of this stitching is that you sew just as furriers do with furs, and you leave the thread once on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is all complete.   
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of sewing, which Galien properly calls, is as some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads of the suture to the other head, in this manner: 
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert a needle or the head of the silk thread nearby, and make it pierce that place only, and leave the two heads of the suture; 
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part to that inside one, along with the two heads of the suture; 
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make one and the other pierce from the outside part to that inside one, in two other heads of silk thread that are on the other side; 
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the gentler way of sewing and the most common. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galien said these words, and some testify to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; 
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must put one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew straps. 
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than those in other places of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the fire has not moved it, then put the intestines back in place, and the seam.  
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put charred charcoal powder on top, and if the fire has moved it, put any ointment that is present on it, until the wound swells. 
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And stitch the thread, and let the sinews and the muscles be joined.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed. 
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicines, put on it as soon as it begins to boil over old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need other medicine for several positions unless the wounds are simple 
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will cause commonality with the principal members, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil, or in rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits; 
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then enemas of warm red wine, and likewise if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines; 
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the fineness of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and its resemblance in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the splinter jumps from the wound, put it back as you would the intestines, while it is fresh. 
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has become green or black, you must bind the place that is black so that blood does not flow into it, for there are veins and arteries. 
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the ligature, and place the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until it loosens for easier extraction when the splinter comes out, and the wound gapes. 
de la routure dou boueil	from the breaking of the eye
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are round, and the wound is small, some men can restore it, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a spear. 
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from it issued excrement and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I have put it to care according to what I could, and did not cease to refine until it was healed, and the wounds joined. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it joined, I doubted that the patient might have pain in his belly. 
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	And he had no pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in a certain way: 
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take bristles at large heads, then bring the lips of the wound together, and when the bristles have opened their mouth, put them on the two lips so that they squeeze their mouths shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then he cuts off the head, and this remains so that it cannot be untied, then put another bristle afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;  
et cout la plaie.	And sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If those hairs burn in the intestine and cause no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: 
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this intestine thread that is well stripped and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread twisted together. Then thread it through a needle and sew the intestine, and smooth it at the break.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of sewing is only according to the way of trust and hope. 
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is nothing but subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it grows old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and bows inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to its greenness, a hard and white knot where there is no pain, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes the bowel is clear and sometimes thick 
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes spotted, and sometimes enough; 
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And as I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, any wound that is not healing and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of nine causes:  
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	namely, by the smallness of blood or flesh; 
ou por sa malice;	or its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, that does not allow new flesh to grow; 
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much bowel;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the veins are spoiled and the matter is of bad quality; 
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a type of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where by its nature, digestion is slow in the region, and feeling is slow, and it swells naturally; 
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones: 
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicine in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is fitting for me to make you aware of the treatment of fistula which is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all the members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the bladder, or to the intestines, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; 
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the nature of the principal member, and similar things.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are in this manner are due to poor healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance; 
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is a fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you are confident of the cure and have seen it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight. 
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is crooked, then use a subtle tent of lead, for the lead bends easily around the curvature. 
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will travel from one opening to another and cleanse it. 
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then have it bleed freely as much as you are able, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is well cleansed beforehand, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it. 
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then treat it according to what I have told you, and remove the corruption and corrupted humors that are within; 
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut deeply as much as you can, then put softened tents soaked in medicinal water, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; 
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then put ointments that promote healthy flesh, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not trouble your principal limbs as we have said; 
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then clean out all the corruption as much as possible, and then treat it with things that promote healing until it is healed. 
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed and returns as before, know that you have not gone far enough. 
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	Expose and scrape out as much as you are at the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore the place. 
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is healed in this way, it is good.  
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. 
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	There is nothing else to do but leave it to nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small corrupted bone and you can remove it with forceps, extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, treat them all and leave none behind. 
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut both moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting decay on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then you will remove the bones more easily; 
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, only promote decay until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; 
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part that has decayed and reaches as far as the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	you must sew and cut everything until the decay, and then treat it until it is healed; 
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example from it and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the materials came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open it. 
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But his doctors in their folly worked so much on it that they opened the abscess and corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all flowed with pus and moisture from the body. 
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and what flowed from the openings into a large container. 
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the young man's body was turning red, and he had a citron color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of those holes, and then I examined all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened therefore and probed into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came as far as the bone inside. 
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to me of the corrupted bone and thought that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed. 
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to restore the wound with hot medicines for a long time and could not solder it. 
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I began again and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing into the bone, and I saw it and removed it, and I tried to solder the place.  
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not do so until I probed around a palm's length of the bone and cut it away entirely, then I restored it with medicines.  
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was healed and soldered quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation often bled, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and was of good disposition and had neither harm nor any contrary at all, either coming or going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place in the body, then it must be treated in this manner: 
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take a ligature and bind it to the head of the bone that appears, and instruct someone to extend it upwards; 
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and place another ligature of wool larger than the first ligature, and tie it upon the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the head, so that you draw down the corrupted flesh, and expose the flesh on the spot where you wish to sew, so that the silk does not stain the flesh; 
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a coal or a board below the bone to move aside the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to treat again another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh. 
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put a coal underneath, and then treat from one part to the other the corruption, and let the treatment be as long as the corruption is a finger's breadth, as we have said. 
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint and treat the bone where it contains from the other side. 
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut.  
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is or in a point of the hand, or or in a point of the foot, then it is very serious, but nevertheless you must inquire into that corruption, how it appears to you. 
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you. 
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. 
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason, it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its instrument.  
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the manners of diseases. 
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	So prepare the instrument you need according to what is fitting.  
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder may dislocate inward or outward. 
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have medicine that corrodes it through the treatment of medicines, and it profits nothing, then it is necessary to cut that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater malice, which is worse than the loss of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes the corruption of member to member, and takes hold throughout the body. 
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If it is from a bite of copper, and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar creatures, if the corruption is at the head of the toe, cauterize it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, cauterize it at the joint so that the corruption does not come up to the arm; 
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, cauterize it at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, death is certain, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; 
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same when the gangrene comes or foot: 
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes in the first joint, then cut off the limb after the other joint; 
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then cut off the whole foot; 
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then cut it at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; 
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister's ties downward, and another minister's ties upward, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ties at a spatula's width, until the bone is exposed; 
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or sew, and put on each side a sheet of linen, so that the sew does not touch the healthy place, and bring to the patient other wounds and abscesses. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if a flow of blood comes when you are working, quickly cauterize the area, or put on some restraining powders. 
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed. 
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to a man in his own foot: 
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackening that looked like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came in the back of his foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot.  
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered the foot and it was healed. 
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And a long time afterward the corruption returned to the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I put things that repel on it after cleaning the body, and I could not stop the corruption.  
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he said that I should hold his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of recovering the matter. 
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak. 
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he despaired altogether and returned to his land, and hastened to hold his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I only tell this story because one might do the same thing if there is need. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in fleshy areas and remains so long that it forms a large collection of pus. 
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it bursts and discharges the pus, and the wound remains open, like some vessels.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin above it is as delicate as a thin cloth and does not extend down to the bone or to the nerve; such an illness is called "healthy" and is not called "fistula." 
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a "fistula"; 
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cook is such that you cut around that skin, and just the same when it is subtle, like a cloth; 
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not spoil because of its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you believe that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not completely gone, and the skin is thick like leather, then treat it with an enema like this: 
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels that come from it have a foul smell, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take alum, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of this according to your need, and make it with vinegar and honey, and in an enema put it into the breast, and draw out the fistula; 
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; 
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breast is softened and the pus is removed;  
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes put in an enema of vinegar ash, when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from vine wood, and pour vinegar over it, then strain it, and use as an enema, until you know that the breast is well cleansed. 
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar ash, then use an enema of vinegar and honey or add a pinch of powdered litharge. 
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	where you cleanse it with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the body breathe. 
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this and are confident that the breast is well purified, then cleanse it with something that produces flesh in it, and take a diaphoretic plaster and make it with rose oil and wine; 
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described or will treat in the discussion of ointments; 
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening of the breast is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, enlarge it a little with an iron instrument and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is enlarged. 
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, sew it up so that only the place where the clyster can enter remains open; and if the opening that leads to the bowels is above, sew it lower than where it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the belly is in perfect condition, do not allow flesh to grow. 
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in such a way that the belly runs to the lowest place where it is; for when the belly is perfect, do not allow flesh to grow and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in this way.  
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Let the belly run slightly downward and do not leave anything of the belly. 
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take consolidating medicines to put over the breast, and spread them on a linen cloth that covers the whole breast.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cover the sore place on the breast as forcefully as possible making the hole larger than the first, then spread ointment often on the other cloth according to the size of the hole, and put it on the sore place on the breast to align the belly, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is outside the belly from the breastbone, often removes it to remove the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it's poison or pus or enough, digested, or undigested. 
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread halfway and you see the nature that leaps up on the breastbone, know that the breasts are already healing, and approaching health. 
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change another bandage, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts swell with undigested food after many days, know that the breasts do not air out.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and some who do the opposite; 
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested bowels leap from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to heal and are inflamed, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, such as diachylon ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last resort medicine; 
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diachylon ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance; 
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it down and use it; 
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and the same made with honey makes it thicker, when diachylon ointment is not present, or you can take myrrh and aloes and frankincense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it has been taken off the fire; 
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	then make it into a paste and spread it over the breast, and administer twice daily aristolochia longa and roots of orchis, which are also like flour of vetch and centaury; 
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simples or compounds: 
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	crush them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it; 
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the sore is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is fully embedded, and makes an impression on the bone, or hard limbs, or limbs;  
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A felon is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps arises in other places;  
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is inflamed and no heed is paid to it, then it becomes a large abscess, running and oozing pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and perhaps runs all through; 
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And corruption comes to the bone, until there is a foul-smelling pain, and the flesh around it becomes wide, and the color is dark. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit, then it is necessary that you cut out all the superfluity which has remained from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; 
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to grow in, and the sore starts, then you should put a wedge under the nail that points at the flesh, lift it up, and cut away this thin flesh subtly and lightly. Then put burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove it all; 
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.  
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and treat it forcefully, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal; 
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the pain corrupting it, so that the wound is shaped like an I as mentioned before, then treat it until it is healed; 
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed and swollen, and it causes great pain, then you must first heal it; 
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the inflamed area with a sharp scalpel, slicing across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the inflamed area, for the patient would feel too much pain; 
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, apply something soothing on top of it.  
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two nails that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is sinew where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some parts of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born with no pain in any part of the body do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the body may possibly move.  
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cut of one who is fleshy should be light, in a measured way: 
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide scalpel. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those who are born at the root of the joint are hard to cure. 
si te tien dou coper.	If you hold them tight.  
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born or about to be born soon, it is fitting that you first shave the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this, and then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The solderings that come to two bones together come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is fitting that you bind that wound so that it may heal according to its natural shape. 
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place it between two soft cloths soaked in rose oil, so that it does not stick together.  
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you may place it between two thin pieces of lead, until its flesh is healed, as it should be.  
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If soldering comes to any of his joints with the palm, then bind that soldering as it is fitting.
des vils	of old men
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large vessels filled with superfluous melancholies that come from various parts of the body. 
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it occurs more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him purging with colocynth, and then apply basil to him.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is done in two ways: 
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is to bind them and strongly draw out the black blood.  
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is that you lift the vein, and treat it completely strongly. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is according to this manner: 
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First raise the leg with very hot water so much that the flesh becomes softened, then strain the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee; 
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide incision, then loosen and strongly treat the black blood with your hand from one side to the other, as much flesh is released as the strength of the patient can endure. 
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then tie it, and order him to abstain from meat containing black bile;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and benefit the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The lifting of the limb is according to this manner: 
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Place the leg of the sick person, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swells the veins. 
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire and then cauterize the place near the vein along the length of the knee or in the part below the ankle. 
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then cut the skin with an awl and flay the vein from each side until it appears when touched. 
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it also appears like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then put the tip underneath, as long as it is raised from the skin and then gently cut it with an awl and cauterize it in another place above the three toes. 
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then flay the skin above the vein until it appears, then ligate it with a ray, just as you have done, and bind it to another hook, just as you have done first. 
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another incision, or several if you need them, then ligate it, and bind it to the second toe, then draw and ligate it up to the second incision. 
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it from incision to incision until it comes out entirely, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot draw and lift it, insert a needle through the whole thread doubled, tie it and draw it up, then insert it under the ray and turn your hand on one side and the other until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot draw or lift it, and the patient will be harmed.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated it all, put on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil. 
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And dress it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the sinew is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but do not cut it. 
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the sinew is curved and does not cut except it cuts a vein.  
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is embedded in the legs, in hot places where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture. 
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes into the body snakes and worms, inject between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is open, it is fitting that you wrap around a piece of linen from three and a half to two and a half fingers, and tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time it begins to come undone, wrap it again around the linen and tie it.  
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, as long as it is all coming out. 
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot or pus and bad sickness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is fitting that it should be treated bit by bit until the end, and nothing remain in the body.  
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and there are times when this vein, when treated, is X palms long, or even more, and one man came to me whose was X palms long, and when you cut it, if it bursts into I rays or holes, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out;  
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the place medicines that prevent putrefaction at any time, then treat it as you would an abscess. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein has few rays, and even when it opens at the joint of the foot or the ankle, and many holes come out and it spurts rays;  
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	then treat it as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This ailment is called in our land "the ox disease," because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and the man feels it well from limb to limb, as long as it runs under the skin where it goes, and jumps strongly;  
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and serpents and lampreys or ascaris in the belly. 
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And one doubts its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may perchance enter and destroy the eye. 
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it healing and draining, one cannot know for sure that it is gone except when it goes: 
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight ligature, then cut above it and drain it well, and if the worm is completely embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.  
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm that it does is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or the head near the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cover above and treat strongly; 
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary for the patient to cleanse the body with dissolving medicines for corrupt humors, and avoid meats that cause putrefaction. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called "shaking" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then can move from limb to limb; 
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I tell you.  
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; 
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another; 
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from that place, and goes into the shoulder, and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm. 
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that it turned back around the body, just as I saw it. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had seen many who well believed they could move pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself as I did in this woman. 
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and that is why this constrained windiness appeared. 
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and full veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this illness being cured, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then apply a poultice above and below quickly, and then cup upon it until this constrained windiness at that place is gone. 
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place; 
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it in your eyes, then the cure of those who expel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the bodies where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of theirs is that there are some which have large points, and small ones, and hairy ones, and smooth ones; 
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where it has parts; 
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and the one which falls in any limb falls according to two manners: 
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	where in a principal member it falls, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you here afterward, appear to you: 
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	So it is necessary that you are wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterward in many situations; 
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not completely embedded, then treat it and care for the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	The sign of the brain when an arrow penetrates and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is on top of the brain, is when there is darkness and drowsiness and greenness and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; 
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils or ears; 
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps loses speech and voice; 
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the wound there appears white moisture resembling pus, and leaps also like burning charcoal;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if these signs appear to you, take care of the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not embedded. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of an arrow when it has lodged or entered are that it is near the left nipple, and also it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow. 
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the arrow also moves like a pulse, and in its course black blood comes forth, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. 
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Know then without doubt that death approaches. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has not been removed is that without any foam it leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and desires cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow has lodged in the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; 
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and there is great groaning and great pain and sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And all the limbs of the shoulders are moved. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow sticks or lodges in the stomach, it may happen that something of the undigested flesh leaps from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes the gut or stomach, and it passes through the intestines without touching any fiber, there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow has lodged in the bladder, and the urine leaps forth and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: 
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal. 
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous as I will tell you so that you may do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell or lodged in the root of his nose: 
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and drew it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and it was healed without pain. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew out an arrow from a young man that had lodged in the fat of his eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and one could only reach the point towards the fletching, and the arrow was large like that of a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; 
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The young man was healed, and no bad accident befell him. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:  
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beard and worked subtly until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And draw an arrow from a man who had it stuck in his belly, and thought he would die. 
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then after thirty days, his condition did not change.  
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow and pulled it out forcefully and there was no bad outcome. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man to whom an arrow has fallen in the back, and the wound is sealed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural state, nor does he find any harm in any of his natural functions. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see another man to whom an arrow has fallen in his face, and the wound is sealed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and it remains thus without him suffering great pain; 
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And I drew an arrow from a man of the prince, the king, that was stuck halfway through his nose, and there was a slight slant to the right side. 
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	And the arrow was all embedded. 
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her three days after she fell. 
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I find the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried every subtle remedy on her, and did not feel her at all; 
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt numbness and pain below her right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put an atractive and digestive plaster on the wound so that the pus would not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the pus from the arrow appeared to me. 
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I kept the plaster on for three days, and sutured the wound deeply, and kept the patient a long time until he felt the arrow one day deep within his flesh;
et il le me dist.	and he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put a strongly corrosive medicinal liquid on the wound for three days until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow lift up in its place. 
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then apply in the opening of the wound that medicine sharp, until the head of the arrow appears visibly to me; 
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and pierce well the edges around four months, and then enlarge if the wound so that I could put in the forceps, and the muscles from one side and the other, and it could not come out; 
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to refine and engineer various instruments until I took it one day with forceps well made, according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, so that I could draw it out, and restore the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was entirely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot contain everything; 
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the wise masters compare very little, and on that which is present and lacking, they find nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign things which happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are stuck except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they enter, or through another part; 
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which comes out through the place where it enters is an arrow entering their flesh, and that rarely happens now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotted around it, and the exit is widened. 
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day. 
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around with a very fine instrument until the wound is enlarged, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents I have mentioned appear to the patient: 
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Do not treat it at all, but leave it as it is until it is equal after several days, for if the arrow comes as far as theCSF  that means death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed in more than the bone alone, and does not reach as far as the sinew, and the patient remains for some days without any bad incident, then draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very deeply lodged and cannot be removed by force, then administer poultices around it as I have told you; 
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the area until it is healthy. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it all over; 
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, treat it with any suitable instrument; 
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then enlarge it until the wound is large;  
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts as much as you can, then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can draw it out; 
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow, lest you draw it out more grievously. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the surrounding flesh has rotted, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about treating it in its chapter;  
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and place something as you can so that you can draw the arrow out without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; 
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient in the form he was when the arrow fell on him for it is the greatest help that there is and if you cannot then put him according to what the signs show you 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where it appears nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it apparently 
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut therefore above as much as the forceps can grasp and then extract it 
si saut fuer maintenant.	if a jump is now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out leave it still and then begin the extraction again as much as it comes out; 
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there were a part of the arrow  push it all the way in;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if there were a point and you see it administering thrusting, if it administers the instrument with its head so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument 
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And then put force, and if the arrow is feathered, put the instrument with a pointed end inside, to make extraction easier. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is fitting that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow lodges in the flesh or the belly or the bladder or the side and it is nearby and you can cut on top of it, cut. 
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And beware of cutting a vein and a nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if needed. 
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat it until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows is like a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the end of the arrow is like the feather of a bird, for piercing at the point of the arrow, as it is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps for pushing and pulling is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there are XVI leaders, namely:  
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two temples that are after the ears, called the two "herbechs"; 
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are apparent in the two temples 
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins which are in the two corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirers" 
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is below the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose; 
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two cords which are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are below the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm: 
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; 
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; 
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilica is either on the right or left side; and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and it is above the fossa; and it is that one from which we bleed, which opens clearly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvation vein is the vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; 
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: 
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second saphena which is at the ankle on the right side; 
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein which is called "nurse," which is at the ankle of the other side;  
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	Bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and migraines; 
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth; 
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two hanging strands from the head: 
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the thumb is at your own pulse, and wherever you feel the pulse below your thumb, that's where to cut in. 
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet and insert it below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upwards, cut through both the skin and the vein well with two strokes, and let the blood flow out as much as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and tie it, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The cutting of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines, habitual and customary ophthalmia, and for the body’s watery tears. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the bloodletting is as I say: 
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the patient tightens their neck, so that the two veins appear openly;  
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And they feel the thumb under your hand, and then you make a sign with the knife. 
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then lift the knife onto the vein above at your index finger, and put the lancet underneath, and lift the vein above and cut it, just as you did in the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need. 
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then loosen the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed. 
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of them and their treatment and extraction, which begins at the start of the book.  
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding of a vein in the forehead is worth as much as the bleeding of the cephalic for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness.  
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting, as long as the vein appears; 
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called a "burin," of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see. 
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then untie the patient's neck and bind the vein until it is healed and never do the work with a wide flame.  
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In any case, it is not right for the flames to be too strong; 
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the angle should not be skewed, because the bone is close and might break by the flames when they are subtle. 
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The vein of the two tears that are in the two eyes helps with these things, and with inflammation, and redness, and the boil in the eye, and diseases of the face; 
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their vein is such that the patient tightens his neck by twisting some cord, as before; 
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and it should be a long vein, a small cut for a single flame a wide one
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, they might break; 
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The vein that runs from the nose is good for water, and for strong thirst, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, even when it is old; 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the vein is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then pulls his nose with your left hand, and takes a thin flame long, and puts it in the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow; 
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too far into the lip, and make the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly restored; 
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the shape of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The vein of the two temples helps with the tightness of the groin, and the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and erysipelas; 
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the treatment is such that the patient must pull his collar down on both sides, as we have said. 
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a stool, then cut the vein along its length widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed; 
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then do the same in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and draw out all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sinews of the veins above the lips help to hold together the mouth and are corrupted by gums, fissures of the lips, and teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the treatment is to make the patient sit in front of you and pull down his collar as I have said. 
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their blackness and because they have small black veins around them. 
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore do one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth diseases. 
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the bleeder is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein: 
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm from which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two manners:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	When you prick with all the flame, myrtle strong, or olive subtle as cutting trenches, and it is called "anesil"; 
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame myrtle is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins raised full of thick blood evident, and that contain thick and troubled blood; 
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and it is for severing small veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilisk, which is one of those veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the belly; 
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the healer that he bleeds it, and that he guards himself from the artery which is below.  
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; 
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame must not be piercing, but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilisk does not open manifestly, it is fitting that you extract it and change for another. 
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	Or if you want no vein from it, or you heal in its place the vein within the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens manifestly; 
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the cautery knife to the flame, as we have said.  
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place of the sinew, it is fitting that you extract the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; 
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of incision, and then bind the arm, and apply the vein to the cautery knife flame.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And be careful not to wound the artery when you see the swollen place, for it is of the artery:
eschui la donques.	Avoid that then. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protrude upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery. 
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and put your thumb on the length of it, then remove your thumb if the blood stops flowing, which often happens. 
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	If it bleeds again, bind the arm, leave it like that, and tell the patient not to move it;  
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be on your guard, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood does not stop flowing and it is coming out at you, and medicine is not present to you, then grasp the artery if it appears, for the head of it retracts;
et estainche li sans.	and stop the bleeding.  
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of ivy root, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if his blood is staunch, it is good; 
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, he should be treated as we have said with powders that staunch blood; 
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staunching is not hindered in several positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the bandage on the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; 
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is fitting for the phlebotomist to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he pierces too deeply and finds the nerve, it will swell and the bleeding will be hindered, and perhaps it cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some men due to its subtlety, then you should draw the blood with a blunt instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And carefully excise the nerve according to your ability. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The artery of the head helps by drawing blood from the head and helping these ones. 
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is best to bleed by cauterizing with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves nor arteries beneath it. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is best to seek the lightest place and do not grieve if one misses the first time, and try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance some men's veins swell when it is missed the first time, but do not worry. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the lancing is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that it is only administered to preserve health and to ward off diseases to come.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins which are as follows:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	These are known as cephalic, facial, and basilic. 
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should bleed at the beginning of spring in young people, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear. 
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And bleeding should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	Bleeding administered for illnesses has no set time, but is done when needed, day or night, at all hours and in all times. 
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not fitting to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying a child from the fourth month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old men who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be bled, in any manner, it is fitting that they cleanse their bowels with a mild clyster if they have retained much phlegm so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines to the principal members. 
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor does he who is too full of meat heal well, nor he who is drunk until he is overcome, nor those with dropsy. 
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And he worsens from sickness after colic attacks, vomiting, discharge of the bowels, and multiplication of childbirth for women, and from labor, staying awake, and fasting, and from whatever drains strength, whether by weapon or by the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly thin the humors if they are too thick, by meats and drinks and by medicines if you have the skill. 
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then bathe him if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from a vein near the wrist on the third day as we have said. 
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep him from work, exertion, and lust, and similar things that day.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be careful and joyful, and let the tourniquet be higher than the one being bled, and rub his arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately for the blood will not run if it is too tight or loose. 
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt. 
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the linen with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand thumb on that vein below the place where you want to bleed, so that the vein does not escape and fail when cut. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee as swiftly as cords upon linen, and if one has such veins full of windiness, so that when the flame is placed upon it, it shrinks from the flame and cannot open the vein, then one is among these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, but the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the linen-handler be knowledgeable in these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, start again a little lower than that place or higher if the limb is not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm. 
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps some boils will form. 
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not bathe afterwards and then begin the setting again if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the puncture is small, or you cut the sinew subtly and doubt that as much blood as you see will not come out, then pierce in that puncture itself all the way through. 
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And work quickly so that the limb is swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this often happens when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, do not begin the setting again and put a bit of linseed oil on it, because it draws the blood from the body and is gentler in that place than the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer a ligature of oil into each vein that you open, to staunch the flow of blood. 
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this same thing does act as a tourniquet and bandage when applied.  
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If it is too thin, the blood will seep through; if it is too thick, it will impede circulation. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there develops a large abscess, which often happens even when the vein has only been opened a few times, or when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry and apply a moistened sponge in warm water and salt to the area for an hour; 
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary to do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, put some aloe or myrrh mixed with calamint juice, monsterwort, or something similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often abscesses and appearances occur at the site of the basilic vein:  
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	So put your hand on it, and if you find the area soft when pressed by your hand, then that appearance is bad. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore beware that you do not put any of what we have said on it, for fear of cutting an artery; 
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.  
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; 
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it flow out until it is thinned;  
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down. 
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is fitting for one who is ill and strong, and needs bloodletting, that they be made a wider wound, and the incision be wide. 
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking. 
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bleeding saves from the running of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than bleeding that is long or wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body lacks for bloodletting, it is fitting to give them softened bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if they are feverish, bleed them three or four times; and if they are of cold complexion, give them before the bleeding softened bread in thick syrup, or in honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a fragrant syrup.  
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after the issuing of much blood, it is fitting that he inhale broth of flesh and subtle aromatic syrup, and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to increase his arm strength, and bleed again, it is fitting that when it is weakened by a great bloodletting, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, then bleed him seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal from another location, it must be healed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and brings fever; 
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it will allow. 
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then when you have observed all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon his pulse while he is recovering, so that death does not come instead of recovery, for this happens many times when the healer is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not fitting when you see the arm loosen and make blood come out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon it. 
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but leave it until it recovers a second time; 
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or apply the point of a flame, as long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out freely, and put upon it a piece of linen moistened in vinegar, and press lightly upon it.  
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is cut near the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the cautery is such that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, until the wrist is red; 
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it is loosely bandaged, so that the vein appears well, then the cautery is now applied crosswise, not wide nor long; 
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And the opening should be wide, and it should be cauterized very close to the joint of the hand, and if none can escape, then put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough; 
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is summer, do not put the hand back into hot water, for it is put in more in winter than in summer; 
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the cautery of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the salvation of the right hand is worth for all liver diseases, and this is the manner: 
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand, and put it in hot water, so much that the vein swells, if you see it. 
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the vein is sideways, and if you cut it all around, it does not hurt anything.  
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not go too deep, because the nerves are underneath all naked of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as needed, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do the same for every vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein in the left hand is worth as much for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you on the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The cautery of the sophene is worth against all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of fluids, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and legs old, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of this vein is that the sick person puts their bare foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and ties above the joint of the foot. 
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins.  
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Heal then the bone or larger sinew, or at the ankle, that moves worthily. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it by passing through as in cutting. 
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And let the flame be numbed. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot in hot water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing fails the first time, start the second time a little higher up, for the flesh is salty. 
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt about the nerve as we have said, and do the same to the sophene of the other foot equally.  
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle strong, and its bleeding is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of this healing is that the patient enters a bath and squeezes above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open. 
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing.  
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth noting that you must copy it, for the flesh is safe, and it is very full of hands. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then any vein that appears or back of the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves; 
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let as much blood flow as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on top and remove it; 
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of cups of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of glass, or of wood; 
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is done in two ways: 
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping that is done without cutting is according to two methods: 
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And bloodletting, which is done by striking and extracting blood, is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is all over the head. 
et li autres est emmi le col;	And the others are along the neck; 
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on both sides of the neck; 
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass below the chin; 
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cupping glasses on both shoulders; 
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glass above the buttocks;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses along both arms;  
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cupping glasses on both legs; 
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cupping glasses on both ankles; 
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and bloodletting does not draw any blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it weakens no one, as one does when drawing blood from a vein. 
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it is not fitting that it should be administered, neither with all fire nor without fire, in any illness which comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is fitting to cup, or for customs, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time. 
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And there are some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness as well.  
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are some who think, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is less than a month old, we order him to be cupped after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sinew of the thigh helps in the treatment of the head wound ... that comes to it, and it is not right that this be done after the evacuation of all the body. 
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this cupping is in place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it is not right that those who are of cold complexion use it, or who have diarrhea, for it does them great harm. 
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore it is not right that the elderly use it, nor those who have or head colds.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves often become stiff, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of stiffness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Cupping on the neck is in place of the sinew of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the breast, and for the fissure of the canal of the lung, and for all, and for repletion.  
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to push a little, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause obstruction or blockage in the stomach and heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Cupping applied to the two ribs near the neck is good for headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, strangulation, and pain in the roots of teeth, and it is placed where the basil vein is located; 
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you must instruct the patient to hold their hand while applying it, so that they do not press on an artery and cause blood to flow. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	Cupping below the chin is good for mouth diseases, gum disease, and similar ailments that occur in the mouth; 
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is placed where the veins of the two lips are located. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	Cupping on the elbows is as effective as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from those large veins; 
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the patient not to thrust too deeply, for the flesh is thin of skin, and beneath are nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is on the buttock is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for illnesses below, and it should be large, and made of horn, so that it can draw well. 
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it were thin, it would break;  
et i fai grans plaies.	and it would make large wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Cupping glasses on the legs draw abundantly, for they pull blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the limbs, and of the bladder, and soften swellings. 
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are placed at the two thighs, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause emaciation in many constitutions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply a cupping glass is such that you put it first empty, and suck moderately, and place it quickly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of blood. 
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then take it off, and put the cupping glasses back on, and be careful in the disposition of bodies, for there are some who have thick flesh, and clear pores. 
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is fitting to strike only once, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep prick. 
et suce legierement.	And suck lightly.  
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the flesh is thick, it is fitting to strike twice. 
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to make subtle the way of thick blood.  
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the flesh is very thick, it is fitting to strike a third time. 
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw out blood little by little, we should only prick once. 
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we should start again often. 
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, pierce deeply enough so that the points are felt and the ends should be such that the hearts are pierced only a little, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have few pores, that you anoint the place of the cupping glass with stimulating and dissolving oil: 
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;  
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is winter, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or oil of anise, and such like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one whom one is treating has tender flesh and large pores, it does not suit to put any oil on, but it must be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should rise with bay leaf, or myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excess weight should rise with old wine, or vinegar water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones.  
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not advisable to apply a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two. 
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after cupping, and it is fitting that he wash himself, when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are being treated who are choleric, and if the flesh is too painful and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is fitting that they take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in season, and similar things; 
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little, and meat from castrated animals, and moist meats.  
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, let them take syrup of honey and moderately spiced wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he will purge himself, he should drink more than eat; 
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is advisable to give some men three anise seeds or musk before the purging, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; 
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the wine be subtle, but it should not be drunk by those who are hot.  
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	Cupping glasses that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the mice, and gout, and on the belly, the buttock, the kidneys, and the hip bone, because these limbs do not suffer from being cut, and we only do it to draw blood from one limb to another, as we put them on the breasts when they bleed. 
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the buttock to weaken the limb. 
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue perchance the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place. 
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and it does so likewise when placed on the liver and on the breast when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only. 
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water, as in pleurisy diseases, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	It should be two handbreadths wide and half a palm long, and it has a small hole near the middle, as for putting in a needle, and it is made of horn, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when put on the limb. 
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have in the middle a rod of ash or iron, to put a chain on it, and they are large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them. 
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's cupping glasses are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat people. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus put this cupping glass upon the limb: 
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the chain of wax or linen, and put it through the cupping glass via the rod which is in the cupping glass, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient; 
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then put it on the limb, and your hands must be over the opening that we have mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and one removes the cupping glass. 
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the bandage as before, and often start again, if you need to. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, and sharp pain, it has neither stem nor hole, and is not administered except when full of water, and is placed upon the member only; 
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:  
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Cupping glasses are administered only in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; 
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on those devoid of flesh, such as bone or veins, and others similar; 
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses which are in sweet, clear water without putrefaction, then take them;  
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them for a night in sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; 
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then let it be bled by vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on bandages. 
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and have shrunk, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it on, for that is worth much afterward. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place a little, and then sharply, very well, and then press it out.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the bandages are too tight after the body of the bandages, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top, until the bandage is softened. 
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are many bandages, then put crushed vitriol or alum and similar things on top until it is softened. 
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you can put half of peeled beans on the place and leave them there until they burn at the spot so that it stops now. 
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other ones. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the lancets do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn. 
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are falling, sprinkle powder on a piece of aloe and salt mashed up, or ashes, then they will come off now. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know ye, son of thread, that the things we are telling in this chapter were never seen by anyone in old books, nor read in any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the science is strange in our land, for I never found anyone good at it. 
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I do not know anything else, except through the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life. 
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two previous chapters. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary therefore that we say or prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain upon virtue, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the sick person on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; 
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is very bad, or too cold; 
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold meats, that is to say, cold dishes, and broth of fowl and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty broths, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, nor spreading of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to his first government which he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourishes the patient with meats that promote fattening, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and pies, and cow's udder, eggs, fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For indeed without nourishment muscles are replenished more quickly than a fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or fused according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children. 
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But have no fear, set the broken bone with large splints that hold and join the limb together, as much as you can strengthen it as it was before. 
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not delay his work, and for this reason he must be fed large meats, as we have said.  
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a skull fracture is different than a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the bone, and another by sharpening, as the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture at all a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every manner, let him have his engine and his proper instrument in restoration, according to what his memory comes back to its place. 
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And a broken bone is known because the flesh is twisted and clearly visible from afar, and it sounds when pressed by the hand. 
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no crookedness or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture. 
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may well have crookedness, or a crack, or a small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not fitting that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come afterwards, and then extract it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture which goes awry, and whose two parts are separated, it is necessary now to put them back together equally, just as abscesses come to life. 
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if a hot abscess comes, leave it alone for a few days until the abscess is calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then put it back together gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces. 
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then remove it, as it should be done afterwards. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the broken bone is in two parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two strings, or one string and a hand. 
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are freed, you reset them by all means possible into their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain. 
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: 
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it is set beautifully, and do not constrain it too much, nor press as those who by their work cause abscesses, heat and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is set properly, admonish the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the limbs are so secured that he does not feel any pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, unless it is slight, and it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. 
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And be careful that he is placed straight, so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.  
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and hands and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to wrap them in soft and delicate linen cloths. 
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, for wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and restrain it equally on all sides, so that there is no dislocation. 
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind it with light bandages, three or four turns depending on the limb, and pull your hand away a little from all the binding, then go above the fracture and pull less, so that the fracture can move away a little. 
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And loosen the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take the other bandage and wind it back over the fractured area. 
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go back to the part below the fracture and pull it moderately, not too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first lesson above. 
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place linen cloths or rags between the bandages so that they are all equal, and then bind everything over with bandages, and then apply your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put on something soothing that heats the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days; 
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch them on your steles, and they should be half the width of a reed, or wood from which clefts are made, or palm fronds, and they should be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the stele which is placed on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; 
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it should also be as long as is fitting for the limb, whether small or large; 
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then stretch them on the steles as you did in the first instance, then tie a thread tightly over them, as in the first instance over the fracture; 
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	Tighter above, looser below. 
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is fitting that the threads be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen; 
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not fitting that there be less than two fingerbreadths of space between each stitch. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore from the heads of the bones after being bound in their bandages, then place under them cloths of flax, or scraps of wool, so that they do not bruise.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to set all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to place stitches closer than after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the heat and swelling that arises from the abscess; 
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsion:  
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg yolks, and make this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way of making a plaster that restores fractures in many positions, and for women and small children as well, because it is neither too hot nor too cold. 
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of plaster to restore a fracture and a dislocation and a twist. 
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take three drams of saffron and of leadwort and of euphrasy and of asafetida and of gum arabic and of frankincense, each one. 
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Myrrh and aloe, each five drams. 
alechil VIIII З.;	Elecampane nine drams.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make powder of them, and mix them with the white of an egg.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many men. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is good for a twist: 
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take frankincense and mallow, each ten drams. 
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Myrrh and aloe, each nine drams.  
acaice VI З.;	Here is the sixth chapter. 
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boil Armenian bole X, and grind it well, and mix with sharp vinegar or plenty of egg white, and administer it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to make a plaster for joints and bones that have been torn from their places, and soothes the pain arising, and the size breaks down the bone, and the fracture. 
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, and soak it in lye and boiled oil, and put it on the place.  
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for calming a hot abscess and properly removes pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: 
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poppy leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and for softening the discharge of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part; 
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	And grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander vinegar, or vinegar, and use it.  
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of marshmallow, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all an equal part; 
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And grind them, and boil with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and he says that it should be between hard and soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that one must put on the broken limb, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of plaster that is worth for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and horsehair stripped, or feathers of birds, and marshmallow, and weigh them equally, and grind them, and make plaster and bind it.  
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then untie it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; 
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not untie it by hand for several days. 
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, lack of rest or swelling, then hurry and untie it, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift it up to the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is eased. 
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen soaked in water or rose oil on it, and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess. 
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin a delicate binding again, and apply a plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before.  
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently continue until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess boils and reddens and has pain and swelling are gone completely, and you need plaster and bandage, if it starts again, as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not untie it for more than three days or four or five or seven.  
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never leave it for twenty days, according to what we see, until the fracture heals and approaches the adjustment of the flesh upon it.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than at first, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before; 
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the place drying out more than is needed, know that nourishment cannot come there; 
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	raise then a poultice of hot water, every time you loosen it, and this should be done every third day, and leave one spot dry.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	through this work then nourish the limb, and quickly amend that which the foolish mirror does, which leaves the limb twisted: 
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and if it is work that frightens, I do not see anything else but to leave it and work straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are destined; 
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the neck breaks all the bone down to the sinew that is below the bone, as a hatchet or axe does;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure". 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the sword cuts the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And the wound of these two fractures is large or small. 
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure, or chips of stone, or falling onto stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that reaches the membrane below the bone, or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is joined to the bone is as subtle as a hair and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary." 
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by a blow of stone or by falling or by something similar and drives the piece of bone inward, and the bones are close together like when smiths hammer on anvils 
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone enters inside 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have or heads with wet bones, such as children's heads.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are detached, like splinters. 
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquisition with probing, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	Similar hairiness is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs quickly upon it, if it appears black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, take care of the patient’s accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and emission of understanding, and stretching, and trembling, and fever ague, and the eyes coming out and reddening, and other similar things in several dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeless situation, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navel cord first comes to you, and it is winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone is corrupted, and the accidents come that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split open the fractured part thus: 
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and take the head of the patient gently, and uncover upon the bone in all the ways that you can, and upon the shape of the wound more often than you can, and if discharge of blood comes to uncovering the bone, or abscess rises, help him with what is necessary, and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscesses that rise are appeased, and be sure of the discharge of blood; 
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin by taking out the bone around it, and this is done according to two working methods: 
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is if you cut a narrow opening in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he inserts another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is if you have several cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of tempered iron;  
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in operation lightly so that you do not bruise the head. 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is fitting that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuts with augers, taking care that they do not pierce beyond the bone into the flesh, and it must have above the point a flange or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the type of bone, so that you have augers for all flesh;  
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and these are the three forms of cauteries: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing through broken bone is that you put the cautery on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know the bone is pierced; 
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the cautery elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with a knife the space of bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as tongs, pincers; 
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.  
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it out, it is necessary that you use an instrument that remains from the bone for all other instruments similar to a knife, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other knife; 
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with instruments. 
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with bandages and dressings as we have described. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer. 
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it highly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put underneath the head of this lenticular scalpel, of which this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, but divide the part in two directions, so that the incision is towards the bone. 
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike with a small mallet on top, so that you gently chip away the bone all around, and be very careful of the cloth underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, remove the bone lightly, for one can remove it well without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not extend to the cloth, and the bone is cut only on the surface, and there are small pieces, then you must file down that roughness and remove the scales with a subtle razor which you should have in various quantities, so as to administer the most suitable one in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you shave before large razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease doing so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other fine cuttings and subtle fractures, you must treat according to its location.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and it is something that is not answered to one who has put his study into this art 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound 
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth; 
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then administer another bandage over it, and do not bind it too tightly just so that it holds the wound only 
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then unbind it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, birthwort, and similar things 
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer immediately worldly medicines without biting; 
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and be careful that the wound is immediately clean, so that you do not leave any ointment there, nor allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it runs and spreads, and causes great harm to the patient; 
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts a mordant thing on the sore, it irritates above it. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come except for the medicine that one has put on it, so that it has some virtue, then it is fitting that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue one drape, and put it on the sore; 
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure in ways that are fitting, until it is healed.  
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones; 
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals. 
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or thumb into the nostril and place the broken part inside your index finger, and push it through a pouch, until the nose returns to its natural shape. 
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.  
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot come back into place, then you must put it equal to the head of a nail with a large hole.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, you must do it otherwise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; 
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then insert at the top of the nose strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	If you put pressure on it from another side, if there is a fracture. 
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And the tendons are so thick that they fill the holes of the nose. 
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some healers say one should soften the bandages with butter and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem right to me, but it is necessary that they be softened in a mixture of egg yolk and mill dust; 
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the tendon, as long as the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes goose feathers are put in place of the tendons, and if it is wrapped with linen cloth, and it holds the fracture together, and breathes for the patient. 
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do what you see fit. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to a head while you are working on it, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a drop of diascordium.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if boils do not come, apply a plaster made from sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put light cloths on top and do not tie the nose. 
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then sew up the wound, and treat things that promote healing, and join together, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this. 
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put splints of plank, until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the breaking of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is knocked down below, and there is no wound showing, and the break is only outward, and it is not broken in two but merely pushed in, so a knowledgeable person can tell easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; 
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of your right hand and gently push the fracture inward, and adjust it with your other hand by force, and make it equal. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that it be equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of teeth occurs, or a break, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put cerate on the broken jawbone and put a double bandage on it. 
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And put on the cloth a large star well-made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width according to the jawbone, and tie it up on the cheekbones that you can reach, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the shape changes, untie it on the third day, and then put back what has been changed. 
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply plaster on it, made from powder from the mill with plenty of egg or rye flour, after you have removed the wax. 
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And put light wool on top of the plaster, and if the plasters dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healed in three weeks. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, treat it as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, see if any piece of bone has been removed. 
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If subtle of the bone to remove suitable instruments. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is large, sew it, and put suitable plasters on it, to promote flesh, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the strong one
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The collarbone breaks several times forward, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:  
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Where it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; 
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a fracture with a wound.  
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the works are so when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; 
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the side;  
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then put the fracture equal to your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor indentation.  
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need;  
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and lift the force, and extract the spear with your hand, so that you put the fracture equal, as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the humerus out backward because it is embedded deep, then it befits that the patient lies often on his back, and put under the shoulder a half pillow, and push the ministers the shoulder down, so much as the bone of the humerus is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then straighten the fracture to your liking, and if you find it shattered, it is necessary that you split it up; 
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and treat the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, cut it with one of the incisors that you have; 
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put this instrument under the splint to keep the fracture in place.  
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon and is not notched, and it should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; 
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you have made when treating the bones.  
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the hot abscess, if it burns the wound, and the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, apply the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if boils come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incision, is that you put on the bone a plaster of flour from the mill and egg yolk, and put light wadding on top, and put a splint under the armpit, if you need it; 
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put two cloths on top of the wadding and the plaster; 
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; 
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage up the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the bone fragment does not move on the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments are slack, then loosen the restraint; 
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put under his armpit when he sleeps a small pillow, to lift the shoulder up; 
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	then the fracture will be relieved of its weight by the elevation of the shoulder, or you tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it until twenty days have passed so that no bad accident occurs; 
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then begin the plaster again if you see he needs it, and remove it and leave it like this until it is restored; 
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored at most in twenty-eight days, and less for some men. 
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated out of place, and it is not healed except by touch. 
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If you fit the apparatus according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in all the ways that you can.  
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites and light bandages, and put a double cloth over it. 
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put a wide and thin splint on it, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if below the splint any hair is found in any place of the shoulder, use linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly. 
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then bind it all with a large bandage firmly so that the splint does not move from its place and examine the binding every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And whenever it swells, bind it again and put the splint back in place if it has moved and have the patient lie on their side. 
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25. 
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is fulfilled, if it dislocates, be sure, for it is not a bone that is put back lightly. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out in front, and not below the heart, then do this: lift it up, set the bone, and do what we have said about the breaking of a bone to soothe a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this rarely happens;  
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken below, it descends, and the patient feels great pain, and a lack of breath, and all at once, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the hair in the broken bone, and he feels it well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with his hands, and subtly sets them equal in all the ways he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; 
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then put on plasters and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or other light herb, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it over the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the ligature round to the back, and remove it carefully, and observe the bandage every hour, and if it softens, remove it; 
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it becomes necessary to untie it due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, scrape off the plaster, and treat what has come about in a suitable manner. 
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then soften the plaster and remove it until it is healed. 
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that a broken rib occurs only in the thick ones after the back, and chiefly inwards, and they do not break except because they are slippery; 
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one can feel it well upon inquiry, as is due.  
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the break back equal, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply a plaster, and remove it with a spatula if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is sloping inwards, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining; 
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and a sharp pain, and everything vomits much blood, and it is a grievous illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it. 
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that hot abscesses will come, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, so be it healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said that one puts cupping glasses on the place to suck out the form, and it seems reasonable. 
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not attract superfluities to the place due to weakness.  
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the place with linen soaked in hot oil, and put wads between the ribs to hold the bandage evenly, then it is cured by a cure of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone pointing through the flesh, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument under it to hold up the skin. 
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one should cut the bone, and pull lightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if boils come, put them on cloths softened in rose oil, and place them on the sore. 
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat while the place of this which suits a boil, and lies often on the side where it should be, until it is healed. 
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bones in the neck, and it happens that he cries;  
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back. 
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, if you take care that if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are removed and not strained, know that the junction of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you see whether it will heal or not, if take heed whether his limbs are softened, and whether accidents are in hands, and on the back there is windiness and discharge without wanting;  
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when he is turned on his belly, there is discharge without wanting. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to raise himself up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:  
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in his treatment 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is appeased; 
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; 
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. 
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bones are broken, it is necessary to cover over the heart;  
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with an anointing poultice, until it is healed; 
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the “head of the cow,” put a pouch from your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand in your power, then apply the plaster and splint on top, if you need it.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then he extracts it, and if there are broken bones, he sets them, and dresses the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It may happen that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does, there should be only a small reduction at the head. 
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And setting it straight for a long time, and lowering it to its place, the patient will feel pain at the site, numbness, and swelling where the break is. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And for the setting, you extend your hand above it as long as you are on the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	And recognize what the fracture is and its shape. 
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is only at the head, you set that fracture equally until it is in its natural shape.  
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inwards, make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equally, put a plaster on it. Then put a splint of wood or horn on top and immobilize the fracture so that it does not move
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And apply the place below the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have previously said. 
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	And then return to the restoration, and remove it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident;  
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the manner. 
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two manners. 
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	One of which is that you take a splint of moderate thickness, according to this form:  
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two ends with two ligatures, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on a seat. 
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then the patient's arm is broken above the elbow, until it reaches the armpit, and one puts a bend in a stick, then leans on any heavy thing or a servant extends it down; 
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the hands together at the break so that the break returns as it should. 
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one lifts the patient onto his backside, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds what is on the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below all the limb, and each extends to his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put one tie below the armpit, and the other toward the elbow, below the break; 
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the break is towards the elbow, it is fitting to put a tie lightly, without strain, so that the break is aligned on the arm and on the elbow; 
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then align the break as it should be, and restrain it, if abscesses do not come.  
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess comes, do not extract it until seven days, and put on moistened linen in wine and rose oil, until the abscess is calmed.  
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; 
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the cloth, and extract on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place of stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints, and put on the break a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break three fingers on each side; 
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then pull upwards on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, pulling harder and less apart. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the seating of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you are setting the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it tied until the seventh day, as we have said; 
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at the bandage every three days, so that it does not itch or swell, or that swelling does not come to the place where the bandages are too tight.  
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is dislocated, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if none of these accidents occur, do not untie it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a cushion of wool evenly under the shoulder and look every hour during the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandages are not loosened; 
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if he heals by virtue of medicine, and gives him the meat we have put before in such a way that the meat is first subtle; 
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, it should be thick.  
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in 40 days altogether; 
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must unbind it and administer baths and ointments for healing the place.  
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and obstructed, it will remain tied up for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two humerus," one of which is small and is that which enters the shoulder pouch. 
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is large and is that which is below towards the little finger.  
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Perhaps only the large humerus breaks, or only the small one, or perhaps both together. 
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small humerus is broken, restoration is easy and healing is quick.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large ones are broken, so is the healing bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only a small bone that is broken, then it is necessary to extend it lightly and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large bone, then it is necessary to bind more strongly; 
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other bones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher up so that the patient does not suffer any hardship.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the ministers' arms below his hand or at the elbow, and another minister above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the sights equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is none detached that you can grasp by the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do so with a bone saw, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; 
si pren la cure.	then take care of it. 
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the restoration boils should arise, then apply a plaster of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft; 
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and I lay a cloth over it subtly, until the abscess is calmed down. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then I remove the wax, and I put a plaster made from mill flour with plenty of egg yolks, and then I place bandages, and let the bandage from the break be stronger now, and a little wider than the others; 
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it must have six bandages or arms in several positions: 
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two; 
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and apply more pressure above the break than anywhere else, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; 
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths above the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread with which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And inspect the limb and the bandage after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must pour hot water on the limb until the itching is appeased. 
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And let the limb not be tightly confined. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, so be it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you are careful so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like that for a few days until the nourishment can flow and then remove it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things which we have said happen to the patient, then do not unbind him for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or when he is in pain, then let him put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back. 
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the temperaments and complexions of the virtues.  
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers there are often small fractures, and they only bring weeping many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it is fitting that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of him equally. 
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then put his hand on the outstretched table, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to the meridians, as long as they are well joined.  
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put on a poultice and bandages, if no abscess forms, then he puts a splint according to the size of the place; 
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth. 
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is in the middle of the sole of the foot, he makes a splint of cloths, and instructs the patient to bind it to his broken sole; 
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then he binds it with a long cloth, and the splint should be as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it as is appropriate.  
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another underneath on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie the whole hand around, and make the bandage tight between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the fingers, if it is the thumb, he sets it straight, as is appropriate; 
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and binds it with the palm, and if you see fit, he puts a small straight splint to lift the fracture, so that it does not move;  
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is on any other finger, such as the index finger or one of the others, set it equal and bind it with the healthy finger that follows. 
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you tie them all together in a splint, which is worth more, or put them on a board, such as a pouch; 
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and help those who come to it, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thighbone is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; 
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration consists in tying one splint above the fracture and the other below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his share equally; 
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.  
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, one of the ligatures should be towards the knee, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be below the knee, and let the extension be downwards. 
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the splints so that the bone is equal to his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bandage, if abscesses do not appear there. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and treatment; 
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap the bandage tightly doubled two or three times, and leave any excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the buttock, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; 
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn up the leg and thigh the bandage, then place on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg. 
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to make the constriction equal, then begin to bind with three or four turns on the fracture. 
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go further above the fracture, loosen the binding.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and thigh, and bind three splints that are above them, then return below to the head of the thread, as far down as the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And loosen it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, until no abscess, swelling or other such thing appears.  
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if one occurs, untie it and treat what has come as we have said many times. 
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are bone fragments that stick out, it is necessary to remove them, if possible.  
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if not, it is necessary to split the area and draw out the force. 
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And whenever the thigh is broken, just as one puts splints in the shoulder and arm; 
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	In all cases, in such a restoration the patient does not falter.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 10 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the passage of the knee, there is not often a break, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is just a crack or a hole, and occurs in all wounds, and open wounds, and this is felt well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done so that what is crooked is aligned with its peers as much as possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster and a round splint if needed, and remove it as necessary. Then observe all the precautions that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses, cauterization, and other similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it meets each situation, so that he may be healed. 
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile". 
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And there are all kinds of fractures as they occur in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that for the arm, and the work is the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bones are broken, so turn them forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well.
et torne desoz.	And it turns downwards. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension and set it equal, and bind the splints equally. 
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nevertheless, if the break is bad and there are several pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and age according to your virtue. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of willow wood that can bind the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down; 
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them twice both above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this binding the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; 
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer sticks as long as the leg, and if it is of willow wood, put them on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make these in the fracture or where there is a wound; 
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the leg every day to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident;  
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	until the cure so that it is healed. 
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the breaking of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not suffer a fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break, and there are two ways this can happen.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that a bone in the foot is broken, and you see these bones rise up against each other, then have the patient put their foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, and then place your foot on theirs where the bones are raised, and then press until they return to their place. 
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put on a plaster and bandages over it, and place under the belly of the foot a small board two finger widths thick, then straighten the foot carefully, and once you have wrapped it in cloths and other things that you need.  
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two bones are broken, set them as we have said for the bones of the hand. 
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be a bit wider, then put under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and straighten it carefully. 
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, place on each bone two splints according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and remove the table from under the foot. 
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be standing on the head of the table beyond the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well. 
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is fitting that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said. 
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each incident as appropriate.  
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone with a dagger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, make her sit wide, then incline her towards the back, and let her be held from behind. 
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the vulva of the patient with cotton, and put in it as large a piece as a fist.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then untie the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then pull the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the stock. 
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so. 
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	The fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a bladder of a lamb, tie a cane to the opening, and insert the whole bladder into the nature. 
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow through the cane until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The body will set the fracture. 
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.  
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of a man or woman's shoulder is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and practice into it, and understand my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates in several ways the right way to restore it. 
enten le donques.	Understand then. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	When a rod is broken, take a goose's throat and put the rod in it.  
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be poulticed now, so that the poultices that we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, and you have no other remedy, then restart to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, so that an abscess does not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if boils come up, leave the restoration until a new day, as long as the boil is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about evil accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent upon the chest uncovered, it behoves you to put it straight lightly with your hands, in small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear to you to be equal with your hands, then the surgeon has this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound. 
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	And it is necessary for him to soak it in three or four [of something unspecified], according to what he needs for each fracture treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and one large lump, so that it does not flatten under pressure on the limb during your work, and it should be sharp in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus: 
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "palainche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the head of the exposed bone; 
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the end is brought down once, so that it returns and they are equal to one another. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it behooves you to cut off the head of the bone, so long as the instruments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if the head of a suitable instrument for this, either an incisor or a saw, is at your disposal; 
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove that which remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this so that it is in its place, then soak the bandage in black stiptic wine, and carefully if it is summer; 
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not put any plaster or other thing on the wound where it has oil, lest it bring forth rot and corruption; 
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind a covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; 
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times this foolish error has been made, and has brought death upon the patient or corrosion some time;  
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the constrictions be softer and gentler than other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not right to put splints on; 
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but bind around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound has begun to swell, remove what you have put on it altogether and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be aligned in such a way that the bone runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day they pass through and it cannot be soldered but keeps coming back down, know that there are small pieces of bone; for which you must want the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces which cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not draw it out at all, for often death follows, but leave it until it rots; 
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can. 
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the boils which come from the solder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, it is a sorry sight to see the shape of the limb. 
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions. 
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take heed then if it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer astringent medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together and mix them with astringent wine or with egg yolk or with oil; 
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on a new bandage, and remove it well, and do not untie it for any day; 
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	And then dislocate it, and start another, until the nodules are removed;  
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you strain on a well-made plank; 
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the plank is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the nodule has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then put a cup on top of it, and make the superfluity appear;  
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you shave it with a razor until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed. 
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limbs remain weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: 
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	For one reason it is because it was tied too tight, and it was not tied as it should have been. 
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the limb.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or because of a multitude of irritations. 
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or because of too large movements, not at its proper time. 
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.  
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, until the blood is multiplied in him; 
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give him baths, and give him joy and rest. 
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment, and often bathe it in warm water, until the nourishment runs to the limb. 
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return to its natural shape. 
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: 
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many a fool has done this in our land; 
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and it brings great evils, and perhaps death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, it is fitting that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; 
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a softening plaster, such as diachylon well made, and you take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with gelatine grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster upon it;  
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Take fat figs and crush them with bran and similar medicines that reduce inflammation. 
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is dislocation removed by continuous and lengthy rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuosity is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut up to the bone with a subtle and light incision.  
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And put cinders and plaster on the wound. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, it is necessary now to bring it back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, it swells up and by chance puts it back in place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, it should not be moved while it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times this brings on spasms and other pains. 
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	In all cases, when this occurs, make the patient healthy, then leave him alone until the abscess has been calmed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then loosen it gently and treat each limb as the treatment comes to its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that both jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners. 
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	Either they are sometimes loosened from their places, and softened a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Or they are entirely dislocated and hang toward the ground, cutting off saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech. 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by means of several arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put the tip of one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is of two parts.  
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And the other hand should be free to place it evenly. 
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he looks at the eye equal, as long as it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if bringing them back is difficult, even when the two jaws are together, then apply a mixture of hot water and oil, until they soften slightly; 
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not try to force them back in place, as we have said. 
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then put soft cloths soaked in cerate made of rose oil and wax on them, and then bind them lightly with soft linen cloths. 
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head resting between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor strain to chew, but take light food, until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed. 
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew lightly what he wants, and do not bother to open his mouth to eat and drink until the mandible is well joined and healed. 
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their position, then fevers and accustomed sweats arise, and possibly a loosening of the bowels, and possibly vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is lost; 
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times he who had it died in nine days.  
de la forcelle	from the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate within the sides of the continuation of the foot, and it is dislocated sometimes at a distance, and one can feel this well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; 
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place with your palm, and it will return;  
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put plaster on top and bandage it, and remove it; 
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head which is toward the elbow cannot dislocate;  
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does, and if it dislocates any time, reset it in its place as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply plaster and bandage it, remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed. 
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in the same way, the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only according to three ways: 
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	One of which is that it dislocates towards the part of the armpit below; 
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second is towards the part of the buttock;  
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And rarely it dislocates upwards, and this happens seldom. 
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor inwards for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And often it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it happens quickly. 
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	To those who have enough flesh, it jumps out at the points, and goes back in at the points. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it sometimes happens to some men that they have a bruise or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore you must try it until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment. 
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it falls toward the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear distinction between them; 
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit at the humerus, the head of the shoulder as if it were a bone; 
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its nest, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, unless it is hidden, because you will find it distinctly at the humerus; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation is not very difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is ill. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	The manner is that the attendants lift the patient's arm above, then place their fingers under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; 
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the attendants lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it below;
si venra hastanment.	it will come quickly. 
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in the first days afterward, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; 
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the attendant apply a softening and soothing liniment, such as a decoction of altaea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be laid on their back, and put under the armpit a cloth of wool equally thick, not too soft nor too hard, then place the patient's heel on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient; 
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; 
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	this shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see the resetting according to this manner: 
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you have a man who is larger than the patient be present; 
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and stand straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm; 
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And resetting can also be done in another way: 
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and that one sticks a long burning coal into the ground, whose head is as round as a pistol, and is neither too thick nor too thin; 
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is placed under the patient, but let him have cloths soaked in vinegar above, and the patient is lying along the length of a log; 
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let his hand be extended on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly. 
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: 
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a firebrand two arms long and four thumbs wide, which has a pointed head to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then tie two cloths soaked in vinegar under the pointed end of the firebrand so that it does not burn the patient, then place it under the patient's armpit. 
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	Extend his arm up the length of the firebrand and tie the shoulder to the firebrand, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a large ladder's rung, and let his hand hang down on the other side. 
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint must now be put back together. 
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, no matter how, it is fitting that you put under the armpit a sphere of wool equal in size, then apply a plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around it, then bind it under the armpit firmly, and return the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he rest a bit, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; 
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days, and move it; 
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been moved out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for another reason, it is fitting that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is laid down in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; 
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place. 
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	Dislocation which is towards the hip and breasts or behind, is done by force and extension of the hands and administered elsewhere; 
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal until it is healthy. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient bathe many times until that stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation one cuts
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the knife is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; 
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it is dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, the dislocation is not put back in place, for one can see it well and feel it well; 
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and it is dislocated according to each figure. 
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick cautery with the healthy one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it in the same way as abscesses should come, for if an abscess were to come, it would be harmful to reset it; 
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be put back in place entirely, even when it is at the back; 
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than the other dislocations and causes greater pain, and by chance death comes. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset like this, you extend your hand with both hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And let his arms be spread out, and his hands put in according to the angle of the knife, above and below, and push the joint towards his thumbs together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place. 
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and tightens from the root of the palm or the costal bone which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension;  
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and when the minister extends the arm and holds it so that it does not move during extension; 
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;  
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the surgeon joins the joint to his hand, he should anoint it with oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together firmly until it returns; 
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg yolk, bind it firmly and sling the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for several days before releasing it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the ligature, and leave it. 
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not hold well, start over with the plaster and the ligature, and leave it like that for several days, until it is firmly in place. 
puis le deslie.	Then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press it until it is relieved. 
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you put a greasy sheep's wool bandage on the joint, then leave it for one day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter the bath. 
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then put the bandage back on and then enter the bath. 
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And thus do it two or three times, until he is healed. 
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see it, put cow dung moistened with heated butter on it, and strain it. 
si revenra a sa disposition.	It will return to its proper place. 
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates and returns easily, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same hour that it dislocates, so that the flesh does not swell, or an abscess comes hot. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the putting back in place is done as follows: you put the sick hand on a table and extend the patient's hand; look at it, and make sure it is straight so that they place their palm facing the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must look to see if it is well in place; 
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the patient's back on a table for stretching and pulling. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the doctor put his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good. 
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply poultices to soothe the abscess and leave it like that without restarting.  
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain crooked; 
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not harm the patient further than that, as long as his hand is weakened and he cannot grasp anything at all.  
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery. 
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other remedy except to pull it out with a cautery, and by chance nothing else will do.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind it and leave it as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some pain, then apply warm water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the joints of the hand are dislocated at any point, sometimes on the back of the palm or in the hollow. 
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then apply force, and push the dislocation towards your thumbs until it returns, then hold the head of the joint, and bend it towards the side where it is separated; 
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day; 
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And at night the bandage, as we have said, and untie it during the day, and make it move, and re-bandage it at night; 
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; 
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Concerning the loosening of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the limbs jump with force involuntarily, and he cannot hold them, and often some limb is softened, either both thighs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the shinbone breaks into four parts; 
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which breaks in back is called "gilbositez." 
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you set it if the "gilbositez" came from childhood: 
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is neither cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures are said in many words, where there is not much profit in all; 
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.  
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the "gilbositez" which comes at the back of the foot, there is neither remedy nor healing; 
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straight to the two sides, and one cannot cure except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be extended on his face in an equal place, and have a support below him so he does not become bruised. 
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put one ember at the head in the earth formed, and the other at the feet, and tie a band under the armpits of the patient, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles; 
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two assistants hold the bands, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two embers.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the ember as we have said, and the surgeon put his palms on the spine in a formed way, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a table of three arm's length, and place it below the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and put the head of the table below the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press hard, until it returns to its place. 
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see it, do it with a wrench that turns in the hand.  
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And place two burning coals at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, with a palm's length of space between each coal. 
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And make a hole in each coal, through which the wrench can pass, and set the coals firmly in the ground so they don't move. 
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each pair of coals place a turning coal, with which the wrench turns, and have two small coals of a palm's length in the two turnings to turn the wrench. 
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the string among the splints to the wrench at the head and the other string to the other wrench towards the feet, and each of the assistants turns his wrench along the entire string, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on them with plenty of egg white, and then bandages, and then the strip of a tablet three fingers long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is sound, then tie it with a ligature as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment, until he is healed; 
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the strip that we have said before; 
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never administer a piece of plum, and never does the appearance come in the back spine of the back, and we think that it is dislocation; 
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have any presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance it might bring death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come loose by dislocations, not like the other joints. 
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inwards and outwards, and in front and behind. 
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more inwards than elsewhere, and rarely dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of this dislocation inwards is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And there is a swelling of a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one to whom it comes is death, if this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of the one who has it in front is that their leg is stretched according to its completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Everywhere, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make it go, it cannot before, and it retains its urine, and swells the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reduction of this kind of dislocation is such that you recognize if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, there is no cure; 
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and one should not presume. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, hasten that you return the joint, and extend it inside and out, and move it to the right and left. 
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return, and needs no other treatment.  
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee.  
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it with a strong cord on the thigh; 
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another holds the head of the cord; 
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.  
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, it is necessary to apply a remedy according to its likeness. 
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh and the place below the angle, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the angle and towards the armpit; 
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then another minister takes his arms and embraces the thick part of the sick thigh and stretches it out in a straight form; 
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it will return to its place now; 
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, it is fitting that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fists longer than the other;  
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then it should be hung on the top of a post, and be raised two arms' lengths above the ground; 
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then command a minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient who embraces the bottom of the thigh, for the joint will now return quickly.  
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the hip, let the patient lie down as we have said for the one with sciatica, and tighten the bandage on the injured leg properly, and on the foot also; 
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one ember between the patient's thighs in the shape of a figure-eight. 
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place cloths moistened with water around them so that they do not burn the patient, then extend each ember towards him and have the patient hold their dislocated limb equal to his hand. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on a table, and press it down as we have said in the treatment of dislocations, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, you must quickly extend the patient's injured leg according to what I have said. 
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And place the embers so that their heat is on the injured angle, then press with the other hand and extend it downwards towards the knee.  
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in back, it is not right to extend the patient downwards or lift them up, but rather they should be as if their hip were dislocated in back, as we have said about lying on both hips. 
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And let it be upon its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint at the table. 
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	It will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. 
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let him rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply plaster on top.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days. 
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then untie it, and let him walk gently, until the limb is strengthened.  
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated according to three methods: 
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inwards and outwards, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	And do not dislocate it again. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you order the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not straighten at his thigh, know that it is dislocated; 
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; 
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides that form the knee; 
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at his thigh easily; 
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on it, and let the leg air at the thigh, and tie them together tightly for three days or four, then untie it; 
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let the patient not move until their limb is comfortable. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The tendons are sometimes loosened, and sometimes completely dislocated, both within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tense before the part where it is dislocated: 
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The resetting should be gentle, and one must extend the arm slightly with their hands when it is only bruised.  
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated altogether, you must make the patient sit upright and hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle; 
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upward and push the foot up well; 
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;  
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is good; 
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, start the work again, for it will return; 
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lay on their back on the ground, and fix a strong stick firmly into the ground between their thighs, and bind cloths around it so that it does not hurt the patient. 
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot to their hands or to a cord which they tie around the ankle. 
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then have each assistant extend evenly, and let the stick be now between the patient's thighs to hold them steady when they are being stretched. 
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place your hands evenly on the dislocation and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is back in place, put a poultice and bandages on top, and bind them firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves which are on the ankle behind so that the bandages are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments loosen, strain it. 
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from moving for four days.  
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it pleases them to stretch beautifully without exertion, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table perfectly straight, and put your foot on what appears of those joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns. 
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is equal and nothing appears, put under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then strain it strongly and leave it for three days, then untie it. 
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest until he is healed.  
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies. 
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are pitiful and merciful and slow, do not be bold. 
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And use at the beginning soothing things to calm the abscess down, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you do not see hope for health. 
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, now reset the limb in its place so that the abscess may drain.  
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to calm the abscess down and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments. 
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break and small bones are detached, set the bones and do what we have said in simple ailments.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body. 
