O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its explanation and by its explanations and definitions.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this part 'chirurgery', which is the work of hands.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, so it is persecuted and rejected that science; and nothing remains from its force but small descriptions found in books by the ancients whose works have been moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises the errors and foolishness, with understanding closed off and knowledge abandoned.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise with the order of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; coming together are the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work along with adjustment in explanation and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found among us at present, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those involved to be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and vessels that move and rest, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates says the joint with no movement is greatly valued, and that which moves little; especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one does not understand what has been mentioned earlier, he should take care to avoid errors and causing harm to people; therefore I have wanted to warn many times those who involve themselves in this science and abandon sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a mad doctor who cut an abscess of hard swellings or the neck of a woman, and severed the arteries in her neck; hence so much blood poured out that the woman bled to death between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he accidentally removed part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if it was too much for them to cut, they would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	A physician took charge of another patient, our land's duke who had a broken leg and an accompanying wound; the inexperienced doctor pushed the break next to the wound with great force without leaving any gap, and left it that way until completion; he instructed him not to dislocate again; the leg remained as such until fully healed and rejoined at the joint, ultimately leading to its demise.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I went quickly called by him and hurried to come dislocate his leg; and when he saw it was dislocated so peacefully, he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the contamination was already established in the member and could not be healed; the corruption continued through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see a certain doctor who collapsed an encrusted abscess, and then inflamed it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a cancer, when it is filled with black bile humor, does not require that you touch it with iron unless there is part of the head where everything can be removed if corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son of the wool weaver, you must know that work by hand is divided into two divisions: this is to say, in each one I will show where there is fear and danger in this book.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 It is why you must be vigilant, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you; if you take your weapons in thought, and begin treating patients lightly yet firmly, using the best approach so by God's grace you come to health and are praised; and leave diseases with hopeful healing; and remove doubt from those tools, having faith within yourself that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 In some of his warnings, Galien said: "Do not take care of the bad illness that you might be called foolish healer.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical-watery caustics, and the chapters are ordered from head to toe; and about swelling forms, metal caustics, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about tailoring and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and forms of swelling.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is on restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar matters; and it orders the resetting of the head down to the fingers, and the shapes of deformities.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to say about the quality of help and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are words of longest length and subtle science and secret remedies; and on this topic spoke many wise men, and agreed to it; and my purpose is little their words, because I repeat at length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps in all temperaments where there is matter; for two temperaments are to be considered: namely hot with moisture and dry without moisture.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combined hot and dry temperament with matter, some say fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others argue the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat from warmth nor dryness on its own; but those who argue otherwise say that fire cautery greatly helps diseases that are both hot and dry, which occur in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body and its moisture in relation to hot temperament, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I adhere to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	le ben; the same que heu, they do not s 0 (e: they to the time. If younus :
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the wise ones gathered together for the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and brings greater good than burning with medical heat.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple and comes to fury only in the member that is burnt, and harms no other limb if it has any name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Medicines that burn come from one body part to another by alignment, and bring serious diseases of difficult healing to the affected member; and sometimes it kills the patient due to its potency and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experiment and long service to the field, as well as my study in which I have put great effort, on the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of words, for it pleases me not that you take away the secret that is kept or written here about fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; so receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when to perform the cauterizations and poultices.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate in all circumstances, because the harm occurring can be addressed by using cauterization; and especially when a cauterization is necessary for urgent and severe pain which cannot wait until more serious afflictions come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish physician; because in the illness cured by cauterization there is no relapse; and they claim it this way; but it's not as they believe, for cauterizations are medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors which cause pain, and its value lies more in its swift efficacy and the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And one possible thing is that the illness arises at any time according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and are combined in him excesses by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless caustics administered on site where there is little excess and moisture, as with caustics for pain relief, and similar things, such that no further pain arises; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that caustics have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they prove ineffective, then we administer our caustic treatment, and it has effect.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then truly, caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization instruments made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated there were no exceptions other than for the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; they also said that the heat from cauterization does not cause putrefaction but is indeed true as I have tested it myself, and found that in some men it is so; cauterization with gold instruments are as effective as those made of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Even so, when you heat an instrument of gold, it is not because the color changes due to heating and then cools off quickly; if overheated, they require rekindling; thus there are sufficient obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use the fire cautery that has proven effective in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil caustic
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the head, and therein one makes due to an illness called 'soda', and from numerous humors descending into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams, pain of teeth and throat, as well as all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	the se quitter that:
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then the patient should sit down, with their hands crossed in front of them, and place their hands on a small stool; afterwards put the base of your palm over the base of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever your fingers come to rest, there it will bleed, then heat up the cautery known as "olivare," for which here is its shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the heat on that spot with ink, and gently draw and stretch your hand little by little while turning it; then slowly release the hand until you see the small bone one piece; if you do not see it, resume heating as I have instructed until you can see the bone; afterwards take a bit of wax, put soft cotton inside, place on the spot and leave for three days; after that, cover with linen cloth soaked in oil; let sit until the burning is gone; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon," until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if said by ancients that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, we aid in its healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must thoroughly cauterize if a portion of the bone is burned, and then remedy what has been scorched from the bone, and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must cauterize extensively, and push so hard as to flatten the bone as wide as the wreath women place in their hairs because the humors flow out of it; and one should thoroughly cleanse an open wound; afterwards, one should heal and bind.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me wholly good in all cases; rather than that in certain patients where there is room for fear; and it appears to me that I should leave them alone; because the head, as we attest from other members, becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions. Similarly, when the patient's head is naturally feeble, and the first sign of cauterization seems more beneficial and healing to me, then in such cases, my work aims for this combined salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From acute pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the pain in the head becomes chronic and lasts a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "coclearia," as well as purging of the head and oils and plasters; but if you perform the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold; then you should perform the cautery below that we have mentioned above, for a little while.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	by the. ous and but that s. This-do.
dou cautere dou chief	In the treatment of the head wound with fire cautery.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the illness extends to the ear, and the head is purged by medicinal substances, and other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases have been applied, but nothing helps: then one performs cauterization according to two methods, that is, with cold medicine and salt.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with cold medicine is that you burn a piece of wax, and remove the bark and cover it again with two grains in two places, then make an incision on the temple where the pain occurs so that you can replace the wax under the skin; and when it has been replaced well and left like this for sixteen hours; then release and bandage the place of the wax, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton plunged in butter until scabbing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is cleaned; and if you see any written prescriptions for burning medicines that I have mentioned or discussed in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery should be applied in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery of which the form is as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. corner, and near one side there's a small opening; and place it on the inflamed area, hold your hand and gently rotate the iron slightly until half of the edge appears charred; lift your hand so that the artery does not burn further back, and abundant blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellus" at the tip, be careful not to seal the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if neither medicine nor iron suffices, then it is necessary to heat the "cultellus" cautery until it becomes white; place your hand on the tender area for half an hour and a quarter of its length, remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not seal the artery but only reach near the bone; beware of jaw movement when biting down and ensure that nerves are neither shocked nor causing spasms in patients, and guard against bleeding from the sealed artery as it may cause great fear and concern to those unfamiliar with the procedure or not experienced. Leave the vessel midway; but I will tell you how to stop the blood flow when the artery is sealed, and show you where this happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, caulk it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, apply the cautery we have described or extraction of the artery with the cautery having two blades; this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From coldness-induced ear pain
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from coldness and you have tried soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not ease, then cool this caustic called "points," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the patient's ear where both sides feel pain, and moving slightly above the ear root after finding the correct position of dislocation; and at six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
de la torture de la bouche	Regarding mouth tormentor
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases; and do not apply heat to conditions resembling scurvy or black hairs from nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture that causes swelling from wasps and head purges, gargling, etc., then you should causticate the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on a healthy part, directing it toward the top of the ear just below the tip of the horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until half the skin is scorched; this is the effect of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the type of incision we have shown before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; then heal them as I have previously stated until they are sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When treating an old apoplexy as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should make three cauterizations: two on each of the two points of the horns (above) on the head, one at the top, and one in the middle, and one where they are called 'vessels' as we have previously said, and apply a cautery to the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have mentioned before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pillows to clear the brain; then, after removing the chief of the patient's head entirely, place upon their occiput a hemp poultice as described in treatments for plasters; this is how cauterization should be performed: do so as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus healthy, it's good; and if not, perform the same as described: three cauterizations of ember below the head to the collarbone with two inches between each cautery; treat them like the others, and if you see a need for additional support, apply one in the middle; and if necessary, perform other cauteries on both horns until he is healthy as before. The cauteries called "olivares" are to be done as previously described.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of hair and as we have previously mentioned; after shaving the patient's head, then make an incision in the head and along each horn, and three on either side of the spine at the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much pain, and the illness is severe, do four incisions along the spine of the back; leave it until the whitest hair grows, then lift your hand; afterward heal as long as it is healthy, and let the incision called "olivare" be done as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Surgical procedures should only be performed on patients who are phlegmatic, and first the brain must be cleansed along with other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when patients are suffering greatly and enduring much medical pain.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot endure much suffering, let them gargle and chew to cleanse the brain often with good meats; afterward, they have their head shaved bald, followed by one cautery as we have previously described, then another on the vein, and each horn; and if patients are very ill and enduring much, perform cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine of the back and neck, in a manner similar to how I have previously described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child who is suffering, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then the cautery of parts as we have said to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses to melancholy, and the body of the ill patient is moist, then give him something to drink so that his brain may be clarified, according to what he has in terms of classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the head of the sick person; after making .i. poultice well made, as .i. circle, put it in his head; and the patient should be crossed, and held securely from all sides; present the liniment, and rub with butter of old sheep; and warm the cloth on fire quickly so that they may endure to pour hot water over them; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool down; and do this to each sick person once a week with other good governance until he is sound.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or when you see that it should be cauterized by making several points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cautery moistens the brain evenly; and then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter and pork fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	From the edge of the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs come first in the eyes as I have described in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that clarifies the mind, protects from all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding the patient to turn his head backward, and making a cautery in the middle of the head, make two cauteries on either side of the temples where the root of the hair is among both eyes together or in one; seal off all veins and arteries that are under the forehead, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood leakage, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it with a thread as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about extracting the artery and making an incision for how to staunch it; never make a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	And from the body, tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear in front of the forehead; and it is seen to be excess cold and phlegmatic fluids, then perform the caustic treatment as I have described at the beginning of this section: one on the head, two above each temple, and two along the eyebrows near the bone; and if there is a need for more, cauterize carefully just under the eyebrow with small treatments.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From within the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of urine cockles; afterward make a caustic treatment on his head, or an oil caustic boil; and also two caustics called "cloves" above the eyebrows near the cheekbones, one just below them; and watch out for the artery so that you do not close it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of fire cautery called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply this cautery which is called "olivariate".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is why this happens: when you see a dislocation; first of all, reset
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that there are two cauteries on the two warts as long as the eyelids are; do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	s
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never is it the case that hairs of the eyelids become inwardly directed, and touch the eye, resulting in cauterization by two methods: one with fire or with burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	The patient is instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; if they touch at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are fully grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the hairs have grown long and even, then place the patient in bed; above the eyelids, make a figure similar to a feather of mirtle (a type of plant), with the beginning signs below the lashes. Then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk oil on the eye, then apply the cauterizing tool as shown here:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the area you have marked with small and frequent touches, let the skin be scorched there; and the signs of health in the wound are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the size of an egg; then remove your hand, and leave it for three days, after which apply soft cotton soaked in butter until the burn heals; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come in and the paper softens as before, then continue the cauterization on that same spot; and if the hair is not sufficient, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and they are even, and do not poke at the original size.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery medical cauterization is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a leaf of parchment; then take French soap and hot wax, half an ounce each, and grind them well together; do it hastily so as not to cool down, then sprinkle on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place paper over it; if the illness is in one part only, work with just that side; if both sides are similar. Then put cotton wool into boiling water; and the patient'lete the head of the patient be safe and press your two fingers on the medicine, and squeeze a little every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, as he feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this at length, then apply the medicine as needed.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the swelling has subsided, lift the limb up again and observe if you see a bulge as though it had been raised by pressure of heat or by incision; and if so, it is well done.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, apply more medicine to the limb or if the medicine has not worked yet, until your treatments are equal and your eyes are sharp; then cover with cotton wool soaked in butter as long as the dew point is reached, after which cure the limb's stiffness called 'dyafenis' along with others, until it becomes sound.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must guard your treatment very carefully to ensure that none escapes from the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 If the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick at the oil, resume medicine on that location where it has been softened by the paper properly, as you did before; after curing, until it is sounded; this is the form of the bellows with the mist.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, let there be constraints; and do not put back the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For treating a fistula with cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	to the cort i bida; sul. icie as:ss eid and, they, but. I; So, so. Chizcor nonece f (the ou; its pate t
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat both pus and dryness; and if it is closed, work on the surrounding area; afterwards place a hot caustic on it, hold your hand on the caustic over the part above the oil without letting your hands go wild; then put the caustic in the oil's fat, and let it fester.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If at the beginning of the fire cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, restart the fire cautery once more if needed, and let it be for three days; afterwards apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat with dry ointment until it is sounded, and after forty days when it becomes sounded, apply corrosive acidic medicine as long as the bone is exposed; then continue treatment according to what appears in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for fistulas which none of the ancient ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 When you have a fistula, and elevate the limb; then insert a slender instrument whose form is as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it in the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand or bandage firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted into oil; and you must place cotton on the oil for the sick person: the lead will then be where there is an abscess, and it heals with a miraculous sanity.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula has been healed by the fire cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, you must administer a poultice to the new wound and bring the fistula back into the appropriate location on the body as it should be placed there.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks on lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, there occur bubbles on the lips that are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these bubbles as we have described in the following method, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it carefully into those bubbles until they burst; afterwards, remove the wax residue so that it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	by son ça ben'
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or around the tooth roots, after becoming putrid and rotten and aged and turning into a fistula; you treat it as we have explained in divisions, and it does not help: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the faster; after burning the opening or mouth of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes cold from its touch, and thereafter at that spot; and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have explained earlier, until it is healed; if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, then you must expose the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	By movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work: then put the head of the patient in his health; after heating the cautery as described below so that you place a spoon on the tooth; and insert within the tooth cautery warmly, and hold your hand until heat comes from the root of the tooth; afterwards lift up hands and resume the cautery according to your will; after wash the patient's mouth with salt, and keep for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the finger which was moving is fixed, the gums softened and held still, and the moisture corrupted dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the fingers
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the fingers comes from coldness or heat and medicinal remedies are ineffective, then there is need for cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauter # query
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or copper; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and the wool soaked in butter forms, and place on the aching tooth quickly; thus do this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth, and if you see hairs and cotton in cold butter, place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron on it until the heat reaches the hardening of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Fire cauldrons are such that you must fill with a stretcher of iron or copper, and make it large enough so the flames do not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its form will come as follows, then place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauldron is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be lessened that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then rinse it out forcefully; and this is the method of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Make a caustic using whatever ingredient you wish and according to your ability; here is what remains of the mixture.
des scrophules	Scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and do not obey medicines, then apply the dry cautery from which later comes this method, and it should have two openings for fumes to escape on the opposite side; place a heated cautery on the abscess once or as necessary until reaching the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use a smaller cautery, leave it thus for three days; place cotton soaked in butter oil until the inflammation subsides; then treat with ointments and bandages until healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the caigne:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When mucus overwhelms the channels near the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then patients must first be purged with solvent medicines; afterwards perform a fire cautery at the root of the throat and ensure not to go all the way to the throat nor burn too deeply.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After performing the fire cautery at the joint of the neck near the top of the spine, and be it the clavicle cauterization as we have previously described; and care for the wound so that we heal it as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	From dislocation
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the prostate are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an early illness; there should be two cauters on either side in front of the eyes; and another cauter between the two testicles; and let there be a cauter called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, perform fire cautery by poking at the entire cauterization called "points" as we have described in the ear disease beforehand; and let the points be up to XXX or nearby.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the head as previously described, apply the fire cautery three times according to this method:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are the cauterizations lighter because you make them thrice in one sitting.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then one must first address the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soaking the patient on their back and sides; then lift the heart located within the space between your left hand's thumb and index finger; and if the joint is dislocated, heat the caustic that has two iron nails with a specific shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And causticize the heart until it reaches the ribs, and the figure of the caustic comes with four caustics; and this is done with the caustic that has three iron nails because the figures of causticization are these four caustics; and the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent is the shape of the caustic that has three iron nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it dislocated near this particular nerve, for which there are six cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After the cautery is applied for the grazes, wrap with linen; then allow the patient to rest and do not move their limb for a long time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it becomes dislocated again above, which rarely happens, then make a fire cautery on the thick flesh near the clavicle, or many cauterizations in that area.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is put back into place, and bone growth occurs with the accumulation of moisture, which brings relief to the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When the stomach experiences coldness and excess moisture until its true nature is revealed, leading to numerous eruptions on it that do not benefit from usual treatments, then the patient should be bared on their back with legs and arms extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After this, apply three cauldrons to the back of the thigh from below the hip for a quantity equivalent to two eggs in total at the cauldron's hinge, and place two cauldrons lateral to both sides as long as the shape of the cauldrons forms at three angles, with equal space between each so they are not joined together when they drop pus; and let the cauldrons be positioned so they protrude into the two parts of the leg's bend, and ensure the cauldron shapes align without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see a large caudron in the stomach according to this shape, and whoever fears this cauldron, puncture and seal above the stomach at that point based on the amount seen inside it; then caulk completely over the cauldron called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the dislocation we have had before, until it is sound.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture as well as excess windiness, until it is far removed from its natural state due to superfluities; thus, patients are treated with what we have previously discussed in divisions, but they gain no benefit, so the patient must be baked on their backside according to this form: Three cauterizations should be made following this shape and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondriac regions, where the edge of the body comes; with space between each cautery equal to an inch. The cauteries should be long along the entire course, and they must not press too much at once onto all the cauterizations. They are dried until only half the skin is burnt, and the patient sits upright on their feet; if unable, then laying down with legs extended and arms lifted. This is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish to do so, if you are skilled and wise in the art of cautery, carefully avoid burning the entire area when treating cutaneous cauldrons; ensure it does not reach the bubble stage, as the region is very delicate there, and it easily bursts.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you see whether it's in the fat or tissue: if it's in the fat, then the patient feels less severe pain; but if it's in the tissue, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment requires the patient to be propped up on their head; then align their body and where the abscess is located, and then heat the caustic resembling a reed like so:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And with the cautery until the core is charred, and comes to asphalt, until all putrefaction is removed; after curing according to the pus removal method until it heals completely; and nothing from this used cautery causes harm except in those who have not studied long in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have spread at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can hardly work, but it seems to me that she should be allowed to move.
dou cautere de pleuresin	t f: bonceze ; you; T1;l's et te ne fun: Ca’t s, nor: ca peu par l’re :
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that you must make pleurisy fire cauteries from the roots of aristolochia in such a way: take a long root of aristolochia as large as possible and find it, dry it, and let it be both thick and long like your fingers; soak it in oil, hold it with tongs, and burn. One fire cautery between the forehead and neck, and two small ones slightly downwards on the part below the beard; two fire cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, inclined slightly backwards; one fire cautery at mid-thigh, another above the stomach; one between the two shoulders, and two in line with the two ribs further from the pleurisy fire cautery between the two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but open it widely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And the ancients said that no man should use fire cautery resembling shaving, and warm it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; and from this method comes great pain, as we have mentioned in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, as a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
de la mice	They say that no one should use razors resembling fire cauteries, and heat it, place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain follows as we have said in the liver. However, there is now a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease of madness as we have discussed in its types and treatments, and it is not effective, then there are three methods of cautery that are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are several ways to do this; perform three or four cauterizations, aligning according to the length of the wound, following the shape of the liver cautery we have discussed beforehand; and do not press your hand onto all cauterizations at once, ensuring that the patient is seated on their back; another way to perform a cauterization is as follows: heat the cautery with two nicks, as we have demonstrated in shoulder dislocation treatment; lift the skin where the wound's edge or the left-side angles of the malady appear, and make elevations from which you lift the skin according to its size, following the width of the body, while the cauterization is made accordingly.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then applying the cautery, thus there will be four; if you see so, cauterize with all of the cautery at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when it has acquired swelling for long periods, this means that the other previously mentioned treatments are needed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery is not used in diuresis; it's only through the method called "scrotal.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have discussed in divisions, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the scrotum, one above the stompitail, one on top of the liver, one on top of the spleen, two behind the back atop the spine, and one near the genitals; and let the cauteries be closely placed to the area where you want it.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open to let pus drain for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient afterward; healing would be hastened, and together with God's help, both intentions are fulfilled.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterization for the belly be the clivulus that we have previously shown; and for the back, it should be an olive-shaped, as shown before in this manner.
de l’enfleure des piez	To address swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the fingers are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and bright with citrine hue, it should be that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery towards yourself.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply therein, in this way you would constrict the bright citrine hue, and perform the cauterization according to this method.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After applying two fire cauteries on each leg at the ankle's edge; let the cauterie be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, mid-leg; leave the cauteries to run lengthwise so bile can drain out; afterwards, treat the other sores as we have said.
de la menoison	Regarding the melancholy condition.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of a stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are flooded, they cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient well suffering with great strength, so do .i. large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before or stomach cauterization, around which cauterizations subtly circulate; and four cauteries surrounding the belly subtly within one fine cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do a large cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the bunions are rooted, one or several, and ancient, consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors, treated as we have said in divisions, but it is not effective even with cauterization: III on the spine of the back, that which lies behind almandate slightly and gradually triangularly, and I on the sole II toes; and if you think its stomach has cooled down, and the flesh does not cook, and you see the face swelling, then a large cauterization on the stomache as said before, and another on the liver, and one between the buttocks with all of them barbed; leave the barbed cautery long times.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the limb until it is sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the chilblains which are called "theelule"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you come to the joint, wet the caustic which seems like a brush, and then set it all ablaze on that part of the joint touched; let your hand and the caustic reach until the vein's birth, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large caustic on inflammations, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When patients cannot endure cutting or incision, we will tell you about it in its place; if there comes a sickness that cannot be healed but by caustic treatment.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there comes an abscess and it is old and filled with rotting decay and corrupted moisture, you must prove the entire subtlety of it, and know how far along each part is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After the fire cautery appears to have scraped it, insert into the abscess according to how much has entered the subtlety, and restart the cauterization until that body part is healed once, or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of sinew needed; be wary not to damage the nerves, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the abscess goes to the bladder and intestine, be wary of these veins, and do not pierce further than is necessary, and think that they are not fearful; after curing the limb until it is sound, if the veins have been sapped, and materials linger for a long time, then know that the vein is entirely sound; and if materials have not lingered, know that the vein is wounded, and corrupted bones at the front; thus as one of these we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Concerning kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of cold comes with severe swelling and lack of desire for women, then you should make fire cautery on both sides with the pointed caustic iron that we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladebag is heavy and cold with moisture, so that the patient holds urine, then you should make fire cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hair begins at the tips of the fingers; there should be one cauterization to the right and one to the left, each as long as our finger joints; and you must also make a back cauterization along the spine, or two if needed; and use the pointed caustic iron according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	Of the dislocation of the joints
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers (testes) are corrupted and their ends delayed; when they come, it causes great pain: then one must do iii. cauteries around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary bladder cautery, and ii. cauteries behind the back; and let the clavicle be cauterized, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	est (buttray the zen dou that:m'fle t
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these fire cauteries are not present, make three large olive-wood cauteries, and the cauterization should be as wide as all the keys; cauterize until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint and it is coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division and treatment does not work, and the disease is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing the ca
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 After the cautery of fire, there are many methods among which some include: making triangular cauterizations along this shape above the thigh's blister with good depth and width, leaving space between each cauterization as large as an almond, and they should be olive-shaped; never perform a cautery in the middle of the head of the thigh for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the burn in the circular manner we have mentioned earlier for the thigh dislocation; but make it such that the circle contains the entire thwart and all parts of length are burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method when dealing with sciatica, where pain resides in the thigh and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it comes just to the thigh and leg, make incisions where the patient says their pain resides, with four incisions above the ankle on the left side; and let there be incision scars, of thickness enough to see through; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three fingers towards the heel or near it, cauterize at the place where they feel the pain with points made by a cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary to act further; and if there are signs that the pain comes from under the knee towards the thigh, perform cauterization with a cutting caustic or circular one, ensuring good care in all your cauterizations so you do not continue burning the nerves and large arteries, and cause no further harm or constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen others who made a caution on the heel of the foot, and they continued until the leg was completely flattened, with the bones also affected, and all the joints were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a gastrostomy, he has met his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the sage say in the leg caustery, as follows, make an iron of such and so thickness, roughly like a newborn's finger or slightly less, and let it be by intervals with space equal to that of two thumb-widths; the intervals should be on both sides equally, also narrowly spaced, and there shall be one iron rod well made; this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until all are red and blistered, then place it on the bandage of the injured thigh, and turn it over to the ribbed side; and once cauterize with a hot iron and leave for three days; and afterwards apply an ointment poultice for extended periods; after wound care until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few people use it; nonetheless, such good cauldrations exist that can be borne, and where they take hold.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The medical fire caustery is such that you make an instrument with intervals in which the edge of the gate descends, and it's made of brass or iron of one length, and at its height have two eyes, and between each have the thickness of a thumb; and they are overlapping both above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the sack on the haunch of the patient lying with a sound side down, and then quickly moving your hand above the sack; afterwards pour between the two circles of hot pitch that has been heated in the fire for one hour, allowing the patient to feel the warmth and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it causes swelling as with fire; and when the swelling has subsided, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the haunch affected by it; leave it so for three days until what is black from bruising turns white; then let it heal strangely after the ointment treatment until it becomes healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, use an instrument as you did in the hand similarly; this is the method of hot plastering, and I have written about it or discussed medical rectification.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal amounts of alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and place in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 If the vessel has any small openings where the tip of a razor can enter; place it into another well-sealed pot and put alkali and quicklime below it, enough so that when you have thoroughly prepared it with your hand, leave it thus until steam and heat or from the sealed pot escape. Then take all the plaster and pour it over the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very cold and administered in the form of various medical treatments and cauterizations on other limbs because it performs a similar work as before, and if with other medicines where one cauterizes the heel just like tarsal joints, and nails and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galiens tells of a case wherein a gentleman was healed from the pain in his heel and sciatic nerve, which caused much relief, and said that no other treatment was given, and it became healthy once after this cure, and then bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner that you shall take the crushed pearl barley green and dry, grind it very finely with a little fat, and apply it to the heel and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and wrap it; and let it be for three hours or as much time needed so that the patient no longer feels burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter a bath until the body is somewhat awakened, and make it enter bed, and the pain will depart entirely and become healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such medicine of caution unless after the evacuation of vital fluids.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is caulcerized with goat fat, it greatly helps; and the cauters must be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and wash it with old oil, and place it over the hollow that is between the thumbs of both hands known as fosciles.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dried goat fat, hold it in fire until it turns to charcoal, then place it over the linen and let it become soot. Repeat this again, and continue doing so as long as you feel by touch that it reaches up to the hip, and pain ceases; this method of caulcerization is called "cauterization of goat fat.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these resembles fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have suffered an infusion of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been purged of putrid pills or other similar substances, place them on their back where they feel pain; mark three lines with dashes, and in each line do five fire cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure. The cauterization should be done like the one called "pins", and if so, make three or four at the midline incision according to this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this illness comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; you will find it at the last vertebra of the back and near its appearance on other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound being cleaned, cauterize it with a caustic lancet in the following manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If fire cautery is used, each part of the spine must be balanced.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, when using a pointed caustic around the spine with lines of two or three, they should be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the area until it is sound as we have said, be careful not to perform caustic in a spot that is near a nerve bundle.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moistures that have spread to every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold conditions and cannot be cured with medicines, then treatment is done through cauldrons placed around the joints of the foot, and each cauldron should be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is need to hold above the back of the foot, then make caustic as much as one says 'none'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come near to joints and others, which often happens, then make caustic on each knee three or four times from each part, all over the olive spot; and if more is needed, do more, but not hold your hand furiously until the desired color is achieved.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 If the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the fire cautery as described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 If the pains are in the hands, make points around both lines; and if there is no pain in the joints, make points on each joint and hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and prescribe remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of them and purge phlegm, they will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	For this swelling due to a snakebite
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the habit of the disease comes with buboes that descend to the knees and are newly formed, when you see them bursting, it is not advisable to wait until tomorrow; and use things that facilitate the belly so that the boils discharge from within. Afterward, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his foreskin as long as the buboes are healed, and massage the legs at his thighs, and apply a tourniquet below the habit of the disease above the bone of the wrist; and do this with a movement that is like half of a circle over the body. Then heat the cautery as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and softens.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then rinse the wounds to their original place; and anoint his hand so they do not return backwards; and work well on his thighs for the patient, and put a cloth over them and a servant over the thighs, and another under the feet that anoint his hands; then apply the fire cautery over the entire area of your hand, and straighten it and lengthen until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, continue again for as long as necessary to reach the bone; but carefully watch that the pus does not come out while applying the fire cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this way the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your procedures are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the fire cautery for children be subtle according to their size and for adults also large according to their measure; after III days heal him with a butter cautery until the burn osteosens; then apply other unguents until healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for XL days so that the wound is well-sealed; and it must be that his sutures are loosened thoroughly, such that the swelling does not protrude when he wants to get up.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after XL days, when he wants to get up, let him be fitted with a well-made bandage and wear it for XL more days; and have good rest, that he works little and watches against too much drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he has learned this so is entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will now describe in its chapter the treatment of tailor.
de la routure dou ventre	Concerning the treatment for stomach wounds.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When varicose veins come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the fire cautery as per its quantity, and leave it one-third of the height; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three angles in accordance with this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first mark the height of the vein and make lines for its width above the varicose veins, and another line below them, and hold your hand firmly around the entire fire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 However, the first fire cautery is lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain arises in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lingers for a long time with medical treatment proving of no value, then it is fitting that it should be cauterized using a "poins" caustic, placed according to the length, size, weakness, virtue, location of twists, and degree of pain in the limb.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is suitable for the first caustic, that's good; if not, start again with another caustic near it, as custom dictates to move to the limb closest to it, so that you must make the caustics until the patient feels comfortable.
de meselerie	Surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The stones are sometimes eased by caustic treatment with great help, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see if it needs to be cauterized, taking care that the disease is at its beginning and has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not extend or stay for long, and you doubt whether corruption might affect the whole patient, then with three cauteries on the head: one above the nose, and another toward the forehead near the ends of the hairs; and two atop the ears, and one behind the jawbone; letting your hand guide the cauterizing until it reaches the bone, and as long as scales emerge so that vapors from thick humors can escape; and cauterize around the wound as previously described.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the bruises are scattered everywhere and they appear quite evidently, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned previously in chief, and also one small cautery on the edge of the collarbone, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and five along the spine of the back, and a large one near the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade, and two at the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and above the joints of the hands and fingers, and around the palms; beware of nerves that lie behind pressing, do not burn them; never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one elsewhere on the bone of the stomach, and another near the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you do of cautery, the more it aids him, and he benefits from it; and understand that the patient does not feel pain with the cautery as healthy people do, because the body is already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in methods of ironwork treatments.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the wound with wheat flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not yet healed, then you make cautery on the affected part of the body according to its size; and let the cautery be a bit transparent in length so that one can see through it; then treat with oil until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At no time is cauterization done on the hand, foot, or back when a nerve causes limb movement to cease, thus leading to swelling; and in any case, it is not addressed unless one knows the limbs and nerves that move through the body.
de albaras	The phrase "de albaras" in Old French does not translate directly into a meaningful sentence or term in English without further context. It could be a part of a larger word or expression, but more information is needed for an accurate translation. If it's a standalone fragment from a medical text, the significance might only become clear when considering its surrounding content and usage within the original manuscript.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is chronic, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a small incision using a cautery according to the desired size; until the paleness subsides and its color changes; then treat with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as swan blood and duck'.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a wart begins and you wish to stop it, use the fire cautery in the shape of a circle around the entirety of the wart.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And yet the sages say that you can do cauterization in the middle of the wart; however, I believe it is not good because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to see this happen before; moreover, it would be better if they were circumcised around with a caustic called "circular", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die out
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and it delays dying due to the excess or from the condition of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or from heat; and you see them rushing towards death: then cauterize around many small caverns by pinching; afterwards leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire wound pierced, then warm the cauldrons of which there is no shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" until the caverns have been perceived, and make them such that the patient feels the currents of decay behind it in some manner so that the course of putrefaction is mitigated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another type of disease called "corrodens" is like a swelling in the limbs, as it consumes them just as dry firewood does to timber.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in place that can withstand cautery and fire together, then make the cauldrons small and large as it should be for the location or illness; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, leaving nothing of it so that everything that is corrupted becomes bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave for three days and apply a poultice with oil until the burns from fire have turned to bone, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying ointments causing joy.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days the wound does not heal nicely, it is good; and if not, resume the fire treatment on that which remains corrupted from being left out.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this mixture was never treated with fever-reducing medicine in lieu of fire cautery; but the fire cautery is more beneficial nonetheless, and I have already discussed the treatment for fevers elsewhere: take what you need from it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that come to the fingers
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Many times, after an arrow is lodged behind it, there arises a disease which we call "close," and it is a large abscess that swells the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is known as fire cautery and water hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 It is a fire cauterization such that you heat the hair as if it were a pen in an envelope, and made of good iron to grip the nail at all sides, with delicate margins; after heating it thoroughly over the nail, turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the cold spot by the nail; leaving so for three days until it begins to ooze pus. Then make a poultice of boiled meadow herbs mixed together with honey, and leave the poultume on the entire night, then the nail will draw up and be extracted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the joint with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then if they are infected from behind the body, and this occurs many times in hands and feet, it is necessary to apply a warm water cautery; and here's how: take a small vessel of iron or copper, or a spoon of wax, place it on the nail causing the verrues; then put the vessel so that it covers all around, then add some hot water, hold your hand firmly, and press back and forth until the margin of the vessel reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to deeply penetrate up to the root. The patient must endure a bit of burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave it as such, and all its roots will fall out eventually.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus do another after, as long as you relieve all those within the body, then treat with poultices that engender health.
li cure dou trembler	after use the unt; The root, buttoe le plus they may of hire, then:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shakes from coldness of limbs or fever quarter day or other, it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries or .iv. upon the spine on the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cauterization or pez, and one over the stomach at the olive oil caustic; this will cease their trembling, and restore health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Never be present by following, boils or pus-filled sores, which come from corrupting materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is appropriate when they appear, to perform a caustic treatment on each head of the pus-filled sore: a subtle caustic made from mirtle wood, wherein the point should be heated by fire, or from long aristolochia root, or with a lenticular caustic.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And never causticize at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow further, but is disrupted of excess, which come from them, and are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is ligated
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great harm from the blood of an artery that is ligated to a wound near the edge or through an incision in an abscess, or on a limb with cautery, and such things; it is a very painful thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if it happens to anyone, hurry and place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much until the blood is calmed from under your finger; then heat with oil (olive or otherwise) several small and large cauterizations as long as they are all red; then take .i., or great or small depending on the size of the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the caster against that vein while holding your finger, until the blood is stemmed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another from those at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve near it, and no further harm comes to the patient; understand that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be adequately staunched if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have said: through cautery, or through extraction if untreated, or with strong binding thread, or with medicines placed on which there is power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained at once.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the staunching of being tightly wrapped in cloths or with burning things on it, or other similar things; if not, soon enough they will fail.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then they should put their finger under the wound on the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is stuck above the wound and vein; but do not move it, instead let it be cooled by cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and sticks; then make incisions there as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for tumors.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, ointments, causes, and applications of cauterizations; and I placed that chapter up to the fingers, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for it is easier understood as follows:
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be taken.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways people come in for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If they come from those who suffer so intensely from their illness that they die easily due to the exhaustion it causes them, and from its severity; and of these we must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these there are those who lose their senses and say, "Wait, I am guardians"; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You must not agree to those who come to you with such behavior, but place greater trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of and have gained knowledge about; and use prognosis and indication in treating the sick so that health is restored; and this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and memory for generations.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	And I have ordered this treatise by chapters as presented here in the chapter on cautery that I have advised from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at its head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the pelvis is too tightly constricted around the head of the child; sometimes it comes about without a known reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all cases that I have witnessed it has been fatal; so for my part, the work on treatments seems to warrant further investigation.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is too great, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is from bone, and the signs you see are the corners above each part, and the vein springs up when pressed by your hand inside, and it does not recede; then one must make three incisions within the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, all moisture is removed completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After straining with linen and powders, add wine and oil, leaving thus until the fifth day; then release it, and heal the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to swell evenly, and provide the patient dried meat without much moisture until the limb is comforted and made whole.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is to look where the head of the abscess opens, and its water channel; for it is never before; never behind; never right; nor ever left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its water channel fills up, as much as you are able to do so; but be careful not to puncture an artery; let blood flow out, such that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of pus.
de reume	For restoration
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" affects either the eyes or genitals, and the illness has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is with fire cautery, where two arteries are burned.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 So it is necessary, when you examine the eyes, that the patient recovers his head; then rub them with a rough linen until the arteries appear, and strain out the collar completely; then look to see if there are lesions near the ears, and they may be few; then tie the eyelids with an abrasive spatula that is half as thick; continue this process until reaching bone level, ensuring it extends widely over the forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, take the spatula from under the artery and burn it above, cutting like two points across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is opened, it bleeds continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the arrow does not pierce upon feeling, you must measure three fingers' worth of space from it, then bind and press to the bone; what is needed for the blood loss is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if nothing remains next to the bone nor does an abscess appear, strain the wound, tie it off, and apply ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	If there are splinters of bone remaining, extract them; if you see that an ostentatious infection occurs at any time, make sure to dress it with a clean cloth or bandage. Then remove the wound as soon as possible and apply ointment until healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When early gout comes and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient headache and similar things occur, it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not help, so we extract arteries from the temples and perform cauterization, as we have discussed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is such that the patient rubs the hair from his temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it beats properly and does not fill quickly like in some men who are very cold; and if it refills, strain a piece of cloth on the collar of the patient, then rub the skin with an abrasive cloth, and wash the area with warm water until the artery is clearly visible again; then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then tie off at both ends and separate with strips from each part; if the artery is fine, turn it to the tip of a pin, then bandage that area according to the amount of blood lost in two pints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not sewn up, it does not heal at all completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of .vj. days/, until .iij.; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding occurs again; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with the caustic spatula until the bone is reached as long as the head remains closed; this is the final work, provided the sick person does not have fever and they are of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is aid in finishing the abscesses, for this reason it is more useful for abscesseS;
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And as on leu sont mes. ESTELLA, ce en toc. Sont cote d’o que tu est le c sunt cogner les pois il soit la ou se c de s conteres tu coulz. Cauchay l’est eulacqui. Ce sans est li est à plus ce de quitar une et a mais, en leu nus est c et. And les ointin; et cuit si to lignoles et c que ce d: qui sont nee clyne coumthat est ce la tene laste
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When excessive menstruation occurs, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a large space, and then when you reach to tie them together, remove both levers, and let an ardent fire burn until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; they should be far apart by the two edges because it is not suitable for this entire cautery at once; this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	la s, and bly; they mde t e ce t
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And they called it the "old cure for contusions," and you must trim hair on a patient with this condition from the forehead, then make three equal incisions along the length of the forehead; one incision should run across the entire front down to the nose, while the others are two fingers wide above the temples. Be cautious not to cut the arteries located two finger-widths above the temples; keep your hand away from the jawline continuation, and make each wound approximately three thumb widths long; prepare a sponge piece and plenty of cloth for blood soaking, then apply steri strips as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that goes up to the second incision; and scrape off all skin that is between the two incisions, completely over the skull above the bone, then make another cut through the middle of the first incision to the other second one, and then extract this flat pincers.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "culterall", which on one side is very sharp and cutting, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the splint pointing toward the chest at its root, and the ribs bowing toward the bone, and the buttocks until it reaches the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And bandage all the vessels that descend from the head as close to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens into the eye, and then continue in the middle crack up to the other side; then drain the blood evenly, expressing the lining for the collected blood. Then put a tent of fine cotton over each fissure, cover with moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form. On the third day, remove the lien (bandage) and apply ample plantain water dressing; then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the eyes of the head
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When from certain catarrhs they come habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with impaired vision and burning pus; and hair falls out, and there is acute pain at the forehead, and sneezing in patients; thus by these incidents one knows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single vein, but rather they arise from many vessels, and it is this congestion to be cured.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you command the patient to return his forehead, then make a large incision in it, and another one wide enough.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and make it an incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples as they move during eating; and when the bone is exposed, extract all the blood with a sponge, then place cotton between the two edges of the incision and tie linen; then cover it with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses. When it's osteoedema, you must rub the bone until hair grows on it again, then treat with measures to relieve inflammebility that cause swelling.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And in this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts tansy, and soak it; then administer to these wounds for healing the entire area fully.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping up of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast, stones from mining, or similar substances as metal; seedlings such as peas, lentils, and beans; or fluids flowing like water easily and resembling other matters.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it is stone in the ear or other matter that does not closely adhere to the ear, nor grows within the ear, place the ear on the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then extract a little drop of violet oil or boiled sesame oil, and make an extraction; if it causes sneezing as a condition, block the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; raise the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Many times it comes about by this treatment; and if it does not come forth, then delicate extractors are used for this purpose.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps up with pincers, that's good; if not, prepare for the subtle extraction of a double needle; and if it doesn't come out this way, make an eel gut incision and insert the head of the eel or ear hole strongly, stuffing around the incision with soft wax so the vents cannot enter with the tube; then properly treat it, as often such force comes as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take grease from where the birds sit, and put on some instrument suitable for that purpose, placing a bit of cotton around; then press the grease over the wound or whatever you are treating, and apply treatment.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't come out from all the things we have said, quickly make an incision in the ear just as much as the abscess appears and swells, and the manner of making the incision is to first hold the patient's head steady; then draw the blood according to its nature, next seat the patient between your hands with his head tilted upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near the fat or whatever it depends on; and let the incision be as round as a crescent until you reach the wound, then treat it to the best of your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if you are drawn out and so as it is made into this form: but not draw them the pierre or seint.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision in that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not attempt when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture until you have tried many methods; then extract carefully with tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is quick.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Then if indeed something gets in the ear, it's necessary for the patient to blow their nose first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it comes out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not, take many pieces according to the length of your staff and light them up slightly, and warm them in fire; then put the patient's hand or ear cupped over it, and stick it on the other side with another piece of metal until all water has flowed out completely, thus they come out entirely. If you see this happening, take a reed, put one end in the ear, and hold the other end in fire until it is glowing; then repeat with more reeds until all water has flown out, as we have said about metal.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of an object if it is small like fleas or similar things, treat as we have described in the division; but if it is a large size that can be felt, prepare for extraction with fine pincers; and the easier to remove will be what lies inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	During the extraction of worms from ears, when treating them as we have discussed in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not work, you must examine the ear with sunlight: if there are no worms visible, use fine tweezers and, if they do not appear, take a small hook-shaped tool from where it is formed.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And they are narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And place the finer tip into the ear according to the amount of pain in the patient's body, then insert it fully throughout the canal; do this often until all hairs are removed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not obey in coming out, insert cotton around the ear canal as I have described for stones; and if they still do not emerge as we have said, apply distillations that ancients have tested in leeching worms, and you will find or treat with distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is shaped thus:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It should be made of silver or a fine-grained iron and have small holes at the top and bottom for distillation; and to press the distilled substance through an instrument of finely wrought iron well suited for this, and if you see, take a sieve and wrap cotton around it promptly on the opening, then pour your oil or juice in the ear canal, and let the ear be filled with the sieve and cotton; then press firmly until the oil is distilled or thoroughly within the ear. The patient feels relief inside, and there are distillations a small cakes around this fire so it can be distilled in the ear, but do not be too cold because medicines would not work if they will be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping up of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perception in their ears; and the same thing happens in adults due to a wound or foreign body within the ear, and these blockages always come partially into the ear so that one cannot see it; and never occurs where there is no sound perceived well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes partially and one cannot see it, it is of worse healing in most cases, and for that which can be seen, you must put the patient's ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, then work on this entire area where its form is.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	that s.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the distillations are weak in the ear, take a fine light razor and dry it slightly over fire, then place it or core of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the pressure from which the patient feels pain in hearing, prick lightly, and ensure that you do not press on the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the size of the perforation, and wheat in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound for any day until it is healed; then take a tent and grease with rosewater paste, and powder with sublimed mercury; if you see discharge from the ear, replace the tent and move another moistened tent made of rosette oil and wax until the inflammation is gone; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If bleeding persists, soak a sponge and drape with cold rosewater, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood accumulation which can be treated by distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelus that comes in papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry is such that it must be spread with tongs and tweezeboar, and wrapped around a spatula of its roots; then place on the luteolin mixture.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not decorticated, then cauterize with a fine lenticular cautery after the incision, and the cauterization thereafter is effective; often times things do not remain attached to their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burned and do not regrow.
de la gresle	Of the grating
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times come to papers things that seem frosty in their shape and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called 'granulation,' and it is a gathering of moisture thick underneath and above; the treatments are thus: be vigilant if granulation appears on either side, and knowing them easily; then make an incision wide enough, then gently scrape each part, then take as pinceries, and bind.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot grasp it without piercing the paper slightly, nothing will harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble a stitch, and care until it heals; and if small, do not force anything, for the ointment will soon restore it and cause irritation.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstones descend into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the hailstones with forceps, bind and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the hailstones are scraped away, apply oil to cleanse the area and treat until the patient feels relief.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from under the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinach is a grease that occurs on cloths and papers above, and it happens mostly in children but also in some adults; it causes great harm to their eyes, and they get cataracts by morning, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes; so they lie down on their faces close to sleeping, covered with moist papers that swell from exinach spread into oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press upon it with your hands and feel something exiting between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the treatment is that the patient places his head in water; then take a linen cloth and make it into a circular tent-like shape according to the quantity of fat from each side, place it over them; press with your thumbs on both sides so that the fat is compressed within the circle. Then use a sharp knife at the spacious spot and make an incision as wide as one makes in the vein's skin; scrape away the softened fat until you reach the exinach, which comes out of the incision in various shapes like pieces of pale white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull all of the mentioned piece of cloth torn between your hands in defeat, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; ensure that you do not get too close to the tear, so that you reach none of the entire area up to the bone, nor press on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the head does not exit at the beginning of the tear, gently increase the tear as it appears; then extract it as we have said, moisten with linen and water, and place over the wound, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such individuals crush the vein to put on an instrument for spoiling that persisting moisture.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let it heal until it is sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes to the site, then treat with plasters soothing until it is sound.
des poilz des papieres	From hairs of parchment
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs from paper arise that are misaligned and aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about types of diseases as accustomed to tears, wrinkling of papers, and albugine until it causes destruction; and there is treatment in four ways: by fire cautery together, or by medicinal ague according to what lies before or chapter on cautery, and done either by incision and suturing or by pincers, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is proper that you place the head of the patient in your palm, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that is good; if not, then puncture with a needle on every thread underneath; and do so at the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow near those hairs, and guide one thread along all over the paper, and turn it to the edge; then make in the part below the paper, below the misaligned hairs, throughout the entire width from large to small rim; then extract a filament, and place underneletechnical papers with cotton and linen threads. Then attach to the paper an outline of iron like that of a bellows, and always ensure that the figure is according to the quantity you see raising the eye which is affected by all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is need for large amounts of paper according to how soft the paper becomes; then make all over the area you have marked with two lines, starting from the largest lump down to small; and it should be one of the splits close to natural hair growth in the tissue of a root, then insert the needle into one of the corners marked by eyesight, then scrape off entirely; then sew the two edges together using a stitch of an awl with a single thread of fine woolen yarn, and drain the blood, and remove excess threads above the eyebrows with any sticky substances if you wish to do so; but if not, do not treat it, then leave the sutures and filaments until three or four days have passed; then heal the wound without stitching and constricting things as drying agents, because the paper comes alive with the dampness of the wound and its joining, but the sutures are movable (as the ancients say), and it is a treatment without fear; and if another method: and that you shape the paper into a form like a mister fir cone, as we have described, using three needles at the corners according to the shape shown here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if the cautereis d’autre de a formit a une.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 If you cannot hold the forceps, and the situation is not equal, take a needle or thread of any kind, and tie it around the eye; then tie another thread near the upper rim, and the second thread near the lower one, and bring together both threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured as we have described, then stitch the two edges of the wound closed, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess appears at your incision site, soothe it with cerote and similar oil-soothing ointment; and sometimes it happens that hair from the perineum grows back: in such cases you must use what we have said about the incision; but sutures on either side are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of ulcers is as follows: and you must convert the paper and press it down according to what I have said, then make two stitches by hand, and two very thin threads as long as the thickness of the paper and its width at the mattress; then wrap both heads with the threads you hold; then carefully join the two together over the paper's edge on one side, and stretch out the two cords from each part; then leave them like this for some days, and the skin that is stretched will dry up and shrink and heal, until it grows back.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed and the bandage has been influenced by external forces, then treat until it is healthy again; and if the wound were to become swollen quickly, and the paper dressing raised, and no longer able to touch the hairs; and this is the form of two sticks that you shall make according to this figure, and in accordance with this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The technique of the work is that you take a fine needle and wind one thread of soft, delicate silk on it; then connect the heads together subtly, ensnaring both ends with threads equal in length to a palm's width; then arrange another fine, short filament of silk briefly onto the end of the first thread; then have the patient place their head under the sun so that the workings are clearly visible, for it is a subtle and minute operation; then insert the needle all the way to the root next to the hair you wish to remove, and pierce the paper quickly as you pull through along with natural hair until you reach the skin's surface. Then extract the hair up to the thread's length, inserting that same or additional hair if there are one or two or three or more; then continue pulling out your hand until all desired hair is removed from the surface of the paper with the natural hair still attached.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the thread has been wound and hair does not come out with it, then you will wind the thread back from its full length until the thread is visible by oil vision; thus you may wind up the thread and filament, remove the oil and leave them for two or three days so that the hair grows in place and sprouts on his skin. And if the hairs are long natural hairs, accompany one along with it and then leaves until it is grown and removed:
de la porriture de l’oil	from the rot of the joint
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called 'aleacrati' occurs in the oil, there are two ways it happens: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens due to a sudden wound, or cutting, or caustic treatment, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of treatment for this is to cut the wound, and separate its lips, and place lin tents inside it, and bandage until it heals; and nothing but drying and constricting substances should be used in its care.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but work on softening things like fenugreek; and rose of water or salted linseed seed when cooked, and poultices made from melted oils, wrap a tent around it, and treat with that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to be vigilant that it does not change in any way from its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely directives for this illness, so that it may return as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	In the oil's flowing forth
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease known as "axacrati", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; the method of treatment involves taking an awl with double thread, inserting it into a hole in the bit, piercing through to the right side so that both threads come out at each corner of the chisel. Then extend the chiser above all along the awl, and the cup has a spatula wide enough.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the shape of the cartilage returns as it should, that's good; if not, take a rasor and place it in the cleft, turn the cartilage, create two splits or slots inside the cartilage; then the head is at the split of the angles from the incision you made, make the angles so when they come together, the shape resembles that of a letter with "I" and "G", then remove that part as determined by how much it sticks out on either side to straighten the cartilage, then bring the two separated parts close, and sew them with wool thread; then apply what we have said about soothing medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from splitting or stitching or cauterization, it is fitting that you make a clean split away from the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then dress between the two layers of a tent as I have mentioned; and you must treat according to the form of the illnness, for its forms are very diverse, and wise masters apply all possible methods so that it may return to its natural shape; and similarly for patients, depending on what treatment and applications in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	When dealing with an illness arises from splitting or stitching or cauterization; accordingly cleanly severed the hairs of papers between the layers of a tent as mentioned; then methods all apply, its form so may return to natural its shape.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs in human hands such that the paper above is soldered with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then it is necessary to place the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and extend the pressure towards it until you remove what has hardened within the subtle spatulum, which should not be too dry nor too sharply cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from a spatulum that is too aggravating or blunts the oil; and make your incision in such a way as to scrape off the gathered matter lightly, allowing the paper to regain its natural shape; and it will be healed completely without any occurrence of fresh water, but with gentle water, and collier (a type of bandage); then place between the paper and oil a tent of linen, and above the oil lay woolen yarn soaked in egg whites; after three days use the mild collier and other similar remedamoisturize until it heals completely.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	That the unguarde est toutes nerves de baintes l’a convele cuyante a si que t'art les nervet, si il li qui vousre du ne oint: si ce l’unner la semblanz, et le pierre cest on li mener.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of making the incision is as follows: instruct the patient to place their head in an upright position, then begin work; remove paper from your hand, then file the nails with small double-edged tools and extend them upward; next take a needle, put some horse hair, or goat, or ox fiber on it along with strong thread; slightly bend the tip of the needle and insert partway into the fingernail, pierce through the entire needle, tie one end of the thread to the nail and extend upward, scrape off all hair near the edge where the nail meets its root and down to the skin, then cut any remaining piece in the base at the junction with a fine strip; ensure that by this incision, the body does not naturally produce tears as usual; never stretch just the nail or thread alone, but as we have said:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure that the incision does not touch or break the soft tissue and nail bed, and that the nail is not pierced; after making the incision, apply a small amount of sealing wax, along with powder made from litargire (a substance used in old remedies), and leave it until the next day; then treat as required until healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	the saint li plague toi untie naistis de.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently lift the nail without being rough, and if you see that it does not diminish or hasten its healing, then drop juice from your mouth into an oil collar made of litargire and red wax resin mixed with flax, and apply the oil until the next day; then proceed to another work according to this same method, until it is completely cured.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then let it drain and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then proceed to the work as before, until it is also healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh on the edge is harmful by great damage in oil, suspend it with a thread and peel off part but not all, so that tears do not come to the wound; then drop into the red oil collar made of litargirotin.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the blow which strikes above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Some men are born with red hair, covering the eyebrow and restraining it at the brow's edge and twisting upwards; it appears like a bushy rose; and in such workings, the patient must keep his head upright, then work on them, treating all those untidily curling to this manner with strength; then cut the first one, and shave completely down to the end, while ensuring not to irritate the skin during treatment; and make an incision at the base of a staphylococcus as we have described in the incision of a fingernail and small forces for which you remove its core, just as the form shown after this method demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the matter has been removed, apply oil made with sealed pigment or distilled through red leather, along with corrosive medicines resembling those mentioned, applying them to a cloth soaked in it ensuring certainty against heat; if nothing remains, and the wound becomes covered, treat the staphylococcus with things that alleviate its heat; then return to your treatment until they are healed, thus acheboring hairs can be treated by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary for you to heal the weakness of each oil through natural ways and accidental methods in practice with iron; and do not place your hand into any of these practices until you see that this member has suffered from such a craft.
des voines des eulz	Of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red spots covered by oil that impair sight and hinder daily activities.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore in the first case you examine, where redness is present and nothing else apart from this condition; then you treat it thusly: instruct the patient to raise their head while sitting upright, and afterward sparingly apply compresses along the entire area according to your wisdom. The compresses should be subtle and doubled as per this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two sores placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you will apply the pressure carefully to those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out hour by hour until you see them removed from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil at the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at midday before the sun, being very zealous in your work so that you do not miss any veins; and when you have done this, let it bleed into the oil with a greenish-red color to corrupt what is lingering there.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot grasp it all in that hour, make a plaster with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave them untouched for several days until the pain is eased and assuredly free from inflammation, then continue as per this method stated before until they are healthy; and this is the form of strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula in the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Mirrors are called "arissati" fistules: when you treat it with cautery and hot ague medicine as I have before described, and if it is not healed, then perform the following operation on the abscess where it must die out, and draw all moisture from it until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	When the bone is exposed and you see decay and darkness, remove all instruments from which it takes its shape; it is called "sharp head", and made of iron in one piece with a pointed end, shaped like a file as seen below.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Place your hand on the decayed bone and twist it between both hands until you know that the decay has been resolved; do this several times, then restore its position with medicinal removers.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the wound is dry and scarred, and the bowels are hardened, remaining so for forty days without healing or abscesses forming, and no other event occurs except it being healthy; if not, there is no other remedy but to bring back the fistula to its original location as per this method: and that you reveal the bone a second time by iron, and with medicinal leaches, and when it has been uncovered, take an auger according to this form, and let the iron auger have three angles, and the shaft be thinned until your eye sees it thus.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it near the bone by the cheekbone, and keep your hand away from the oil pot, then turn the entire thing until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels pain because of this if they hold their hand against their nose; and thereafter replace its original dried medicines as I have instructed you, and when the charcoal forms and hardens the ointments, so goes the matter to the nose; it is a lighter task for the afflicted.
de l’issue de l’oil	To prevent a recurrence of dislocation from the arm's extremity.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones are completely dislocated and there is no distortion or narrowing of the neck, then you must tie up the patient; after that, cleanse it, and then apply cups or haterels to draw out without causing harm, followed by an application on the arm made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolum. Then stretch the arm, and place bandages above stitches with fabric; you must arrange the fabrics so that each piece is soft enough, and double it fourfold, then put one over another according to the amount needed by the limb; then strain through a leather strip folded in half, and resume cupping without causing harm; then remove the cups and leave the arm stretched day and night, and if the band is softened considerably, then you must untie it completely. Then remove the band after the day and night, and if you see the limb returning, that's good; but if not, resume the bandages, strainers, bands, cupping, and continue until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The double falling of a cloth torn
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the double tearing of a cloth occurs, then it opens, and comes out with particles as if grains of resin, and is inevitable to see; then you cut off the area up to there where it ends above, then insert another needle at the root of that part down to the upper part; and pierce it through. Leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then sew together the double thread from that part lower down, tie a portion around the wound, hold it tightly, then extract the needle and place a soft cloth generously therein; leave until the threads fall out with the wound, then treat with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never does the wound remain confined by the wound each part of a circle of fabric, until it's healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a large appearance, pierce at the subtle spot which appears just below the wound, and follow the white-ish moisture descending into the eye socket, and enter it quickly; then extract as soon as possible until healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bow of the elbow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease known as 'alcunnati' is not just water assembled in the oil, appearing like descending rain, and it is not true water; the appearance of its workmanship suggests that you have the patient sit on a well-appointed chair and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and let the bow come up as long as you see it rising above your fingers; then insert it firmly and do not remove or untie the threads, observe all things that should be seen as usual by the patient; and if they do not seem to fall off, know it is true water, and if the setting of the bow as we have said is not correctly made.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient lies between your hands, then take fine spatula and touch near the horny veil, gently with the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny veil and crown, until it bulges; and when it is done, let drip in the oil warm honey diluted with water or boiled fenugreek seeds and honey, then be treated by another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the resemblance of waters in division, and what needs to be pierced; working according to health conditions.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light and sun, and lubricate it with ointment strongly; then put the oil paper on your left hand if its edge is leftward, or on your right hand if its edge is rightward; then take in your right hand, if its edge is leftward, the instrument called "almagda", or on your left hand if its edge is rightward; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a slight slit from the horny veil to the edge oil part under the minor rim, and insert the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and turn your hand until it pierces through the oil edge, and feel that almagta approaches the empty space; and the measure of the pathway almagda must be at the full extent of the space from the plumule to the end of the blackness; this is the crown of the oil; if you see bone in the paper by the brightness of the horny veil, then place the instrument up to there or where the oil is, and press it out through a way afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water now flows out, see the patient before you and the instrument within its bowl.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting briefly, and the water rises through the second channel, place the cautery with the instrument inside its bowl; when it is firmly inserted and does not rise further, gently rotate your hand slightly around it to remove the clot; then return a small amount of black seed oil into the vessel.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert an infusion or linen soaked in rose water and oil into it abundantly; seal with the vessel of health.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We and those of our time apply a compress plentifully with oil.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	cont the nud Marcude; s.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 Then gently puncture the conjunctiva only, not too deeply but just enough to release oil as we have said; and at the end of this work, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient where they may sleep on their back in a dimly lit room; ensure they are completely still, with light movements and easily digestible foods, keeping their head straight without turning left or right, following their natural position until the third day; then remove them from that dark chamber to examine their eyesight and show them various objects. After seven days, reattach the ligature as before but do not perform this during the hour of healing or immediately after incision now, rather you should wait, because the oil rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess opens, release the oil before the seventh day and apply remedy to soothe it; and when it is calmed, cover the wound with a bandage for one day and leave it in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 Then let the wound heal gradually and turn into scars; and know that no apprentices should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And all those that one may be found in our ground from therein, and often comes the paiant to ce estoie que tu esprue de qu'il qui les mord leis poinde l’on seintaindont li cist li vient ait ons ne ire.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the forms of almagda because those who do not recognize them see them as such; and they are properly called arrows.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	They are heads with the same subtlety, and three corners sharply angled.
de la char sor le neis	Of a chariot over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 No time brings various infections, from which some appear as many stings of stingrays; and if there are such or have been infected with furious colors, and have turned pale like bones.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In this case of such infections that are pale and not infected, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; work on their nostrils, pour the vinegar into those wounds, and treat them with force; cover what you can grasp at the spatula's subtle sharp edge until you know that such infection has turned entirely to bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there remains any substance that cannot be removed, apply all the fine subtle remedies lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if it swells or forms an abscess, treat as appropriate; and if malignant abscesses are present, cauterize quickly until they are cleansed and the bones are fully exposed, then pour oil, honey, water, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not work and moisture reaches the palate, assure that they are healthy; if moisture does not pierce as it should, suspect there is decay in the bone above, which prevents tendons from cutting: then you must tie a linen thread of moderate thickness between your hands, and leave space about an inch or less between each; position the patient's head so they can grip the end of the fil with their teeth, pulling away until it comes out through the mouth; this is how children at school are treated often, and it is easy for those who do it willingly; then hold the head that emerges from the mouth in one hand, and the other part that emerges from the mouth in the other hand, assessing each in turn as we feel with our thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do the same as you know that they have corrupted that vessel, then bring forth the child, draw out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian salve, and put it back to its place; do this for three days or more until the salves dissolve all that is stuck in the vessel. Then insert a gauze pad into the neck for some time until healing, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them; this is the tool's form used to cleanse the head, from which one distills oils and medicines into the neck.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Et sise de lait un chef dun le chef et ausne de, se oevre les cheualie c'on li oe une estremes à croist: adle, si comest li chiés a sai telle chier quoi on neis chief a, ce ou li. Et les mainture; et aloche tu ; siequolli que se diech escomme l’on de la meravez les qui cheur oe cuit duce chef une che le unle pous chiue ce est de. Et les anque dulles ne, mais li tient cheis iustes eues et.
de la char sor le neis	Of a chariot over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the forehead, which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must begin by cutting it out completely, then applying strong ointments or hot medicines. If you delay doing so until it becomes large, be wary if it feels hard, has a reddish color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable boil; for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the sore is sensitive to touch but does not have a reddish hue, you can see that it may be completely cauterized. Then empty the abscess without fear, and heal dry and constricting things therein.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut or injured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Believe that when a continuous flow of solutions comes into one of these cartilaginous workings, it benefits little in any men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Thus when this occurs in anyone, first check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then sew up both edges and treat until they are healed; and if the edges have become detached on each side, it must be that you scrape off all parts of their core until they heal, then bring together both edges to a single stitch, and strain, and powder with bloodpowder of dragon, and incense crushed; and place over the powders a piece of frankincense of strong or other frankincense melted, and leave it until it hardens by itself, then treat with ointment until they are healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suture is that you assemble the closure: with needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When at home the abscess becomes hard like grains of pepper, both smaller and larger; then you must cut the edges, make incisions on either side, grasp with forceps and apply it to each part; afterwards place a poultice after vitriol incision, until the wound is healed; and then bandage it loosely, and treat the area drying until it becomes healthy.
de la char des gencives	From the decay of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often there is decay on the gums which the ancients called «albulus»; if it needs to be supported with pincers, and applied at its root, and let bleeding occur from the wound or blood; then apply a poultice of vitriol powder or other restraining and desiccating substances; and if that decay returns after incision, and often happens again, repeat the cauterization: it does not return after this treatment; these are the methods to heal ulcers.
des sordens	of soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At no time are they assembled at the top of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, with ugly and sharp scabs; and never do their teeth turn black and greenish-yellow until corruption comes to the gums, and their breath becomes foul; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his eyes are in your hand, and remove any gum or scabs found, so long as there is nothing left behind; and thus do blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other discolorations until they come to light; and if anything taken for the first reason is good, it is well; if not, begin again on the second day and third, until you have completely removed them all; and know that teeth need various forms of treatments to heal, according to what the work shows, because the razor from which one removes the gums has different shapes than those used between the gangs; and these shapes and others are with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay the extraction as long as possible, because it should not be done too hastily; for it is a substance so high until there is no reason left for removal.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is strained from milking, you must be certain about the pressure point.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain troubles the patient, and they think it is a toothache or gum disease, so they extract the bad tooth; however, the pain does not leave until the illness has spread, for we have already made this correction in other cases; and when you are certain about the loose tooth, then it must be scraped around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum on all sides; then move it slightly with your fingers or with fine pliers gradually until it is well aligned, then firmly fix the tenailles; and let the head of the shoulder remain in its saint place between your joints, so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come loose, take any of these liniments and rub them inside from each side gently, and move them as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 If the tooth is pierced and filled, it should be stuffed with bandages where the gums are; and if strained carefully with tongs, so that it does not break when extracted; and one must work very skillfully around the gum tissue to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And do it well so that you don't break it, leaving a part behind, and causing greater pain to the patient from the root's malevolence when reinserted.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not proceed as the ignorant barber does, who through haste and boldness breaks a cartilage every time, without providing any of what we have described; but they bring about great disease in the roots where it remains or in the cartilage that is broken, just as often happens; and when the tooth is pulled out, cleanse its socket with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs there, which often happens, fill the socket with vitriol paste; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the strands, to which one moves the fingers first, have long points and thick branches, not doubling when you pull on the thread; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large members such that they do not bend while pulling, and made of well-forged iron, with teeth to grip tightly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the fingers
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary to place on its location a piece of cloth soaked in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 While the tooth is smoothed, use the pliers called "algèfre", making it appear as a surgeon's needle, and inside them are made like a file, which shapes it.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out through these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a tongs-like tool.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root springs from it, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, as these forms come after this.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument which has two handles, here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments used for examining the gums, and this instrument that appears to be large pincers, its form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument must not break; there are many instruments for examining the gums; also other instruments that are uncounted; and wise masters discover by themselves their instruments, according to their treatments and the diseases they show, because there are different maladies where the old did not teach any instrument due to variety among them. And it does not break on the carriage or the other bones when affected, but if you seek the instruments that I have mentioned, here is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	They must be large and firmly hold the bone without slipping but can remove it; then restore to its place with appropriate medicines for that condition, and if there is decay in the bone which is small, you have all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not in their natural place and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, one must discern if the nerve is behind the tooth and not properly positioned, and cannot be moved or filed down; then scrape with a tool. And if it is bent together with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown here, similar to a small beak, made of iron hook sharp at one end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And grasp the tool gently over several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others; and if it is visible that it can be filed, shape it as shown here with part of this filing instrument.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is as with the filing of needles; and file the tooth gently over several days until it becomes smooth; then in the end grind it completely flat, without any rough edges, and if the nerve is too sharp and bleeds into the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is level, so that it does not bleed into the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When teeth need to be extracted by percussion or falling out, the patient cannot press down on what they bite without spitting, and you have cured them with restraining medicines that are ineffective; therefore they require being tied with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rust, but gold never changes. The wire should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; if you see the teeth aligned, take the wire and fold it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the extracted teeth among them until you securely reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume covering up to where you began, and gently and skillfully extract using your fingers, without moving anything; keep your tool close to the root of the lost toche so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then cut the head of the bone with pliers, and assemble them, placing between a healthy tooth, ensuring it does not chafe the tongue; then leave it as tightly packed as possible for as long as it can remain, and if it loosens or cracks, replace with a new filament; thus it would stay firmly in place and serve throughout its intended lifespressure, forming properly aligned teeth and shaping them like the two healthy teeth:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, reset it back into place as freshly as we have described; and do not involve anyone who is not skilled and patient in this procedure, nor shape it like a wild boar's tooth, but put it where it belongs according to its absence, and restrain as previously explained, allowing it to remain there for an extended period.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of a boil of the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Never is there a linkage that comes from under the tongue or nature, which we create this way; or by accident of a quickly healed wound; and its treatments are such that you work on the patient's mouth with their head intact, lifting the tongue; then cut the nerve link at its base until the tongue is loosened from its position, and if there is hardness or numbness, it's a result of an injury, so use tweezebob to widen that area; and ensure not to fray too much near where the artery lies underneath; once done, raise the water rose and eyelid veil, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; each night massage the patient so their eye may move.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 If the swelling of blood occurs, put vitriolic paste on it; and if there is pus, cauterize with a spatula that is good for this; then treat with other remedebe until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of a color or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it as it is cancer; and if there's discharge like pus, apply onion juice and then use an unguent to dissolve it from both sides; and if it still persists after your initial treatment, put vitriol paste until healed. Then return to the previous method of treating until you finish everything thoroughly; then raise the head with water and salt, and treat with other remedangs as long as they are sane.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 There are never kidneys in the throat called "goitre", and they are properly known as two almonds; and when you treat them as we have described in the division, if they are not healed, be careful: if it's a small abscess of flesh color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for the bleeding; but leave them until they heal, then you shall divide them, or it may break on its own; and if they are of a flesh-white color and the roots are delicate, prepare the instrument carefully, but first ensure that the abscess is resting and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then have the patient sit in front of the sun with their head hanging down, and work your fingers inside their mouth and insert the tool between his hands, pressing the tongue from below along the entire instrument; and it should be made of silver or fine iron just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with this instrument entirely and see if there is an abscess? Then take a needle and insert it into the almond, and pull the pus above as much as possible; and do not touch anything else with wool. After that, wrap the head of the instrument (which appears like one force) with wool:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument with you, use tongs of which this form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it has a sharp and blunt side; and when you have captured one of the almonds with the cap, capture the other in the same manner, then after making an incision gargle the patient's mouth with hot water, vinegar, and herbs to stop bleeding if it occurs, then again gargle with warm water or cooked quince seeds, myrtle leaves, etc., until the wound is healed; And no other abscesses should appear in the throat except for these two almonds, so capture them accordingly as you did with the first.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman for an abscess in her throat, which was small; and it had swollen the entire throat so much that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so large that it had been split into two parts by its two openings.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Once I quickly did it and inserted the iron rod into one nostril, then the pathway was twisted, and great portions of bone were cut; next I redirected to another opening through the nose without teeth, touching the oral cavity and pressing on the tongue; afterwards I placed the iron rod in these abscesses, partially cutting out one part, with only a small amount of blood being drawn. Thus, the conduits of the woman's throat were cleaved, and she began to drink water then wine, without stopping from removing that abscess over long periods. The abscesses would recur again, filling up more than I had emptied until it became very large; so then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: thus there was no growth. After leaving those areas, only God could do anything about them afterwards.
de l’uve	From of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they are reduced to the eye, and it is closed and long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is out of round and large, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not take effect, and you see that the abscess is calmed but subtle, then it must be excised; and if it is round and not long, and whether it is bloody or of fatty color or black, then an incision on its part may be necessary.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of its size and length, seat the patient facing the sun with the tongue pressed to the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, push outward, and make an incision on either side at II estramentos as previously mentioned for the incision of the II almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary that you do not cover with too much padding beyond the natural limit; for if you cover more, it will cause problems to speech and voice; and after an incision, follow what we have said in the treatment of two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient has fear of the padding, then you must employ an instrument for reassurance during its application.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of this cautery is to treat acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And it is that the patient should put his head in your hands and then press his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned for this type of cautery, and concoct with freshly boiled water so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the closing device of this tool, which has the following shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here comes le coupsus la medicine si tu n’est li recoupe la medicin lesmede. Pou replei. Est parle the medicine, tant ceut la a lune. Tu ardide la mire enlucie cite lesquarre de le mieux est dude la medecel et d’elle le ouste tu la garnes ce li recu.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective with incision than with the cautery; if it's treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and yellow yarrow and origanum (oregano) and rue and chamomile and avronne (avranle) and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these into a pot. Then make easy boiling; and the pots should be well stuck with strong clay, and within the pot there should be an instrument inserted as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And whether of silver or of lead, and either the head be placed in the patient's mouth as vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is purified; upon recommencement often, until the vein dries, and ensure that you do not start at the beginning of the abscess boil, for many things can occur; and do not do this only when there is a decline of hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and place inside the head an egg shell of wax so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell of wax does not cause vapor to burden the mouth, and it is good cure together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	of the following text is a medieval French, around 12th-13th centuries.:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the strum be bent towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head upwards; and watch to not touch the epiglottis, for if all goes well, do not push in any bone inside; move as needed so the patient places the instrument, because where it is less dense; then blows out of the mouth or pulls forcefully with the entire instrument evenly until it is done.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the obstruction of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 At no time is medicine without suction, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not benefit at all, then look into the patient's throat with sunlight, and press their tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see suction, make it all small hooks or delicate pincers suitable for that purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if it does not serve the purpose, take a waxed string and place it in the patient's throat, then remove or cut the string with hot iron frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient has consumed water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a pitcher of cold water and work on the mouth, causing them to swallow, moving it often with their hand; and if suction feels like water immediately, spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 If it does not come out as we have said, then saturate the patient with aromatics using the instrument I mentioned in uve fumigation; do this many times, for it will detestably reek.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot where there are charcoal embers and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and through this hole stick the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and have the patient place his palm over the mouthpiece so that smoke does not escape but comes up to the nostrils; now the nose will detestably reek if it does not come out, then repeat the fumigaturess several times. Suffer thirst and consume various filthy things and ashes, without drinking any water, until this treatment is needed.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used for suffocation is such that when it can be seen, it resembles bent pincers to enter into the throat; and it has a shape like a doctor's spoon, with roughness of sand so that whatever it takes in cannot escape. And here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form of this instrument, which resembles surgical forceps, equipped with abrasions on the edges; and has a sharp points for grasping or holding tissues:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many kinds of abscesses, as our recollection comes here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and there are two ways, one being the same kind, due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for lumps that occur on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because abscesses in the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses that arise on bones are different from those occurring in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until they come to completion; and those which require piercing when fully formed, do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses occur near joints and are left to ripen completely, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may become damaged, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When an abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay puncturing until it has matured, it will harm the principal limb; or if it's near the base, then pierce just enough so that it may ripen completely without spreading outward too much, and a fistula forms. And it cannot be healed in a significant amount of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must you pierce the abscess; and so is heu leu percedez maintes et se la semblanz est douces leu, et lorant ors lesperit dument eus li percerte, et ne doit lou lecumbre le pierre.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those cases where they bulge, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in its natural place, it should be moved so that you leave the puncture until digestion is completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce him before this area, it will draw out the poison from his body and be filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips become hardened and the depths of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what is needed by the limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary to pierce small abscesses with small punctures, large abscesse with large punctures, and multiple openings according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that need their heads cut off, and covered; when they become as soft as wool and hardened, then do so like one does a blister: and if there are ones fissured in three angles, and those pierced like a reed's sheath, like hook-like abscesses; and those with circular cuts, other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, if an abscess forms superficially like a pustule, you must pierce it easily; and when the abscess is large, and has thick walls, and you pierce it, do not draw out all of its contents at once, but part of them; then bind the abscess until the next day, then refrain from further intervention; repeat this procedure gradually over time until completely drained; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly and infirm men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the pus sometimes bursts on its own from within, which may cause the patient's death unexpectedly; beware of this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cleanse this treatise with great caution, and when you have perceived the abscess, open the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a simple size, prepare dressings from linen or old cotton; and if they are large abscesses, and there is much discharge, it must be that you insert one dressing so that they touch each other; and if in the abscess you have cut into part of the skin, and wrapped around it, it must be filled with old cotton or linen thread without moisture, and tied until the third day; then change, and apply ointment until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your wound, treat with cold water and ease, and moistened cloth, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if bleeding persists, treat with proper care and medication, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, placing them on the wound as needed; and if it is winter or spring, and the bite or abscess area is very swollen, cover it with moistened tents and cloths soaked in warm wine or oil for three days as we have said; then drain the abscess and cleanse and treat it as necessary until healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is how it should be generally known in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of swellings
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses appear on the head, they have methods of treatment that are similar to linen cloth swaths, and there are many like it.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that are fatty and such like hairs; and there are others that are hard and painful to cut, with no doubt if the arrow does not cause harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the operations of dilation are such that you try with all instruments called "entromissors," from which the form comes afterward, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if they contain moisture, they protrude excessively long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it because it reappears if you leave anything; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and they will be burned on those left during night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And so begin again with cotton as before, on the second day and third, ensuring it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is large and hard, treat it as follows: lance with the instrument according to this method, deep in; then pour on the unguents, scrape off all surfaces, and apply your entire treatment of suturing over where it lies; and if you encounter an arrow, do as I have instructed before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat the abscess if it is pus-filled, and with the scalpel and curette as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And for cutting into a pus-filled abscess that is wet and less dense, there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if any of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and among these are the abscesses that I described above with a head from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and bloody, unable to break; and had it been struck by anyone, they would have made a wound as if of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses coming or heads that come from the top of children and roots of ears, open them as soon as possible at their nearest point, in order for pus to be discharged; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	Scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, below the shoulders and elbangs, and never elsewhere on the body or limbs, and they are numerous, and are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each swelling is properly due to heat on its side, as are the lumps and abscesses in the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities of these swellings.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are those that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In those cases where you see a good disposition to touch, and it is similar in color to the body's flesh, and moves equally on both sides but is neither loose over the veins nor arteries nor conduits, and not deep; then it must be lopped from above, skinned off each part, and extended with two layers of skin around the incision sites as needed, as we have said in abscesses of the head; gently pull the sutures bit by bit, being careful not to cut any nerves or veins, nor is there any black discharge or bleeding that prevents healing, and do not stretch too far forward, only cutting what you must.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you open the vein or artery and cannot work it, put vitriol powder in the wound or any substance that stops bleeding, and bind the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed and softened, and then let it begin to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the vein is closed off, return to your work until completed; then apply your prescribed remedy if there are no small abscesses present, and treat them accordingly.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the abscess, do not cut out that abscess entirely but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat accordingly.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you remove the entire swelling, it is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound and hold them until there is no excess due to the size of the swelling.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is necessary to tie off the root of it, and extract the pus, and close as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those swellings that have excess fluid, pierce there where the honeycomb is open; and pierce as previously mentioned, depending on it, then dress with ointment and similar things so that it does not spoil what has been left from putrefaction; and when the wound is properly cleaned, apply a healing oil bandage until it is healthy.
de squinance	And if you cut out any scrofula, puncture, where as mentioned to be treated well before afore drain likewise salve of health from purge and similar ointment after the area is thoroughly cleansed with infection heal until fully. And when it pus exits cure so they are inh:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The elders spoke and wrote about the treatment of throat ailments; however, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have swelling, it is necessary that the cut in the throat called "epiglute" be cleared; and this cannot be treated by urine, because all veins and the main part of the sickness are present with abscesses high up in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Thus, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should make the incision just above three circles or four with a small slit across, between two circles or by the amount of the slit in its fold; and those edges are suitable for the sectioning of the ep groat that there is no jaggedness, and the sutures are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to its full extent, then cut through until it reaches the cartilage; and clamp off the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then close the incision as we have said; and shown by the swelling of the cartilage that bursts from the place that is broken, and due to the loss of voice; and leave the open wound covered.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time of doubt about strangulation has passed, gather together the two lips of the wound on the cheek, and sew it all tightly so that there is no gap; then apply remedies which make fresh flesh grow until it heals well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	line; Much; the acute f (et la:l're the said pard. If heu; ça ben tret na morte.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then take the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus preventing death; and so they commanded to leave the open wound until the illness has passed, which is usually in three or four days, and then they ordered it be stitched up and cleaned, until cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw a maiden took the knife and stabbed it in her throat, cutting part of the esophagus, and I rushed to cure her, and found her as close to dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood was issuing from it; moreover, it seemed well that it had not consumed any bone or conducted a vein except for the throat, as life flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried, and stitched the ward, and treated it until healed; but for the maiden there was only a change in her voice tone, and she returned to normal afterwards; so I say that in treating the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	In the throat's large entrance
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These boils are called "throat hernia," and they are large boils of a jet color, occurring mostly in women; there are two ways: natural and accidental, with the natural one having no preparation.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental occurrence has two ways: one resembling fat deposits, and the other resembles boils that come from our arteries; there is fear, and it does not require any surgery in those who are small or without veins, but you must try and examine everything thoroughly. If you find them similar to fatty tissue, and they do not lead to any vein, then cut around as one would shave hairs, and treat throughout its entire surface; if there is anything present, and cure it as necessary until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many ways to treat us, of which I will say all the appearances; and now it is necessary for me to speak of the entire difference that exists between our methods and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is fevers and heat-stricken, as long as the boiling point has not passed, and decomposition is complete; then the fever subsides and the heat lessens.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 Neither do we have heat nor fever nor pain, and contain pus, which is its own sac and follows the color of the body; it begins as a small lump and becomes large; there are two appearances, either hard or moist, and many colors as I mentioned in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the wound, that you first try and examine all the instrument called "entre-miseroire," according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the manner of incising abscesses is to grip or find a softer spot than where you perceive in the abscess and turn it slightly with both hands until you know that pressure has been felt on the skin; then extract the entrometamorphosis, being careful as there may be more.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs from a boil and has color as I have mentioned with other abscesses; and if after the intervention there is no more moisture, know that it is fatty, so do this just as I said before; and take it at the incision sites, and lightly scrape off each part while keeping the coat intact where it lies, then cleanse it with a cloth as needed; and if you cannot make it clean all at once, cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, it will return many times; and if a bit stays, the wound is not painful, so apply some corrosive powders to the wound, tighten it up, put in soothing abscess-drying substances, and treat other injuries until they are healed; and if there is much, cut along the edges of the wound, and remove debris as needed.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the wound is inflamed or something else if you hasten and apply a lead of vitriol paste, leave it for two or three days until the swelling subsides, and let bleeding rest; then return to cooking what has been left undone.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 See the forms of entwined tendons, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them there are three quarters called "albaret," and one is called "breb," and among them there are three sizes: large, medium, and small, to search for abscesses in a fistula; they resemble needles used by sorcerers, made of citrus wood or iron or silver, and those that move are as effective as those that are yellow, and more tested ones are black to search for cystic fistulas; there are three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the passage.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two cysts come in three kinds each; and those with three cysts also have three kinds each; and those with two cysts or only one, they too come in three kinds each; all these must be in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The chief of these tools that are sharp and those where only one side is cut, from which we scrape the skin so that veins or nerves are not severed; and for inserting them in channels such that the patient does not feel them upon abscess opening. And there are three manners: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are only used where flesh is fleshy, like legs, arms, chest, elbangs, and similar areas; never another instrument made small, resembling lancet incisions according to this method, which stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	Et cela se fait une seule fois à l’endroit sain où les veines sont ligotées, et aux artères, ainsi que par cette grande méthode : pour les recoudre.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Never do the breasts of men swell when they begin to corrupt, until they appear like women's; and remain ugly and swoln, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form of treatment line b. from g:.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape off the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with anointing charms of medicine, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it is healed; if the flesh hangs downwards, soften it due to its size as often occurs in women, then cut it into two strips on either side, so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, ensuring the larger spans across containing the smaller according to this pattern, from line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the leather between the two edges, and remove the fat, and treat as we have described for stitching and powders, and anything necessary in the care until it is healed; if not healed or because the patient refuses rest or due to blood loss, one must fill the wound with a cotton pad soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until the remnant tissue and fat are reabsorbed, then dress it until it is well.
des apostemes des asselles	For abscesses in the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And when it often during times evacunet les plaies dule esproves blood and healess on l'est à toi sances sont asseles plies la veue de isles estires, as muches de cuer of snes, et doles tisemples:
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those thus containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess have been emptied, apply a woolen cloth to the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove all the wool and treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles swellings like we have said of groin sores, treat it by making incisions as we have described for groin sores before; and if the wound contains bowels, then perform cautery as we have described earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the dislocation of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is open, and the skin over it is swollen, many abscesses occur, along with inflammation in the vein and abscess; when you feel this for your hands, you feel great strain; when it's about the veins, there are numerous large abscesses appearing; it is foolish to cut such an abscess, especially when it occurs beneath joints, bends, or other areas with much flesh.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary then to remove the metal plating, and in those who are chiefs it must also be removed, and in those whose artery swells above the skin; next operate on the inguinal area with needles, and carefully open the artery through its layers until exposed; then insert a needle underneath one, and pierce it all the way to the opposite side, and secure the artery using double filaments in two places as I have shown you when extracting arteries located on temples; meanwhile, do not remove the flesh between the two ligatures until it is free of blood flow, then care for the wound with bandages until healed; if the abscess is by the groin vein area, ensure that you take as much of the abscess under your hand as possible; then again insert a needangle beneath the tissue held in your hand, and pierce it, ensuring double filament, pulling from the opposite side; then bind the abscess, as I have told you before with two ends joined by double filaments; and if you doubt whether the threads are strong enough, reinforce them by inserting another needle through all four threads underneath the first incision of the original needle, and secure the threads in eight places; then cut away any excess tissue until bare, then clip off the excess skin and leave only what is necessary for binding; finally, apply a poultice of wine vinegar and oil, and care for it with bandages and ointments until healed.
des apostemes des ners	From boils to nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, they become abscesses of nerves when injured or due to excessive labor.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This often occurs in the shoulders and elbows as well as in all places where there are joints, it is the most painful abscesses, and its color appears like that of the body's skin, and they have various conditions with pain; and when forcibebly straightened, the patient feels intense pain, which is not even throughout the body but from below the head; and moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor downwards nor upwards, and those who are dislocated cannot be properly set using iron: they may experience contraction. And those with injuries at the top or forehead form hard scabs over sores.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, use forceps to hold it at its base; and if large, tie it with thread, scrape off dead tissue, then stitch up the wound, and care for it until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 At no time does it occur in the belly or elsewhere; it is a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, with fine roots and thick stalks; there are both small and very large ones; I have seen people who had two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no difference, white color, fine root, split in the middle, filled with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed them and found one to be eighteen ounces and the other six ounces; in making the incision, it is so that you should examine if the patient's tissues are moist, with a pale white color of vessels and moist fine roots; broaden the opening, and keep the fire cautery nearby.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 This comes from the ax-breaker, where there are often great losses of blood, and if it does not cease, then quickly apply a caustic; and if you see the patient anxious and fearful of the incision with iron, take well-made linen thread and tie off the artery as we have said, leaving it for three days; then tighten further, continuously straining with the linen thread until the bleeding stops, without causing him pain; if the roots are thick, cauterize carefully on his abdamen, but cover the majority well, and then causticate so that it does not recur; then treat the wound, ensuring you do not cauterize the extremity which is of sickly color and weak sensation and looks pale.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an ulcer that has hardened, and I shall come to the treatment of this syphilitic sore hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when there are boils or furuncles
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of gangrene comes from wound or tearing of the syphilis, and is on the abdomen with some pus pockets as in other regions, or blood leaks from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or swelling; and if it's from the tear of syphilis and discharge of the abscess, then its color resembles that of the body'hemorrrhagic appearances, and is a minor thing without pain but open to various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the outflow of the intestine, then there are many variations, and when pressed on its sides it bursts open, and then returns, and sometimes becomes hardened, greatly expanding at the entrance of the bowel and requiring vigorous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to moisture, it's minor and open when you press with your hand without constraint; and if it's due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard according to quantity, and protruding outwardly; and if it's swelling, it is sensitive upon touching, and its treatment should be observed to see if the appearance is that of arterial bleeding, or veins, or swelling.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to let the healing take place.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowels, then it is necessary for you to instruct the patient to soak his linen in wine and have them extended straight, then bind them entirely around the belly; next command him to lie supine between your hands, then work with a spatula at the area you have selected all around the great bone prominence; then tie half of the abscess extended above along the entire length firmly with a strong thread or cord of sturdy silk, and make sure it is secure; then address the other half of the abscess while it remains extended on the ligament; if you find it caught to the bone, detach them and place the intestine towards the exit below the abdamen; and if you find a tumor, extract its excess; and if the artery or vein presents opposition, then gently pass around with your hands, return to your workstation, take two needles, insert them at the crossing where you perforated, strain the abscess by pulling on these two needles, and then release it as soon as the dead tissue has been expelled; or remove the needles when they become subtle and porous, treat according to what we have mentioned, and extract any blood or moisture that you find, then cure based on what is needed, and close up the abscess just like we instructed.
dou chancre	Of a carbuncle
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about chancres resembling certain things, and how one should treat them with medicine, and bleed using leeches; let us speak of chancre starting in the joints, requiring great caution during treatment, and as per ancient sources, if a chancre is present or can be removed like one found under the nipples, in the groin, or on the thighs, it should be completely excised at the beginning; and when they are large and old, there is no need to approach them, for I have never known anyone healed from them before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the operation is present or can be excised as we have said, purge the patient of black bile once; then provide a good resting place for the operation to perform the procedure; then apply onion poultices or chancres and cut off all hairs and tissue from any part, leaving nothing behind; let it bleed fully, squeeze out well onto your hand or something else, and if the progression of blood causes contrary to the incision in the vein or artery, cauterize until they are sealed; then perform another treatment till healing occurs.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 In the division of similarities to dropsy, we have discussed how the assembly of water occurs in the body and signs of each appearance, and the treatment carried out with medicines or iron; they differ significantly; one should not touch with iron in these two appearances: tympanites and hyposarcoma, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when treating this dropsy-like semblance called "eclites" by medicine, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has other diseases besides dropsie; as we have seen with gastrointestinal solutions and such matters; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt. If you see a strong patient solely affected by dropsy, neither too young nor too old, treat in this way: lift the patient on your hands, and let the assistant press the abdomen, pushing water towards the lowest part of the intestine; then take the spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And use a sharp instrument of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And use a sharp instrument of two parts, with one point and always not so thick that it can reach the intestines when inserted. Then check if dropsy has begun towards the intestines; if necessary, make an incision above the navel straight up to three finger widths high; and if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the cut on the left side of the navel at that height; and if it's from kidney stones, do so on the right, but ensure the patient does not lie directly over the incision as excess fluids may flow there. Then pierce all the tissue with the instrument, fill it, and remove your hand completely from the abdomam area like when scraping a small amount of flesh or near to; then pierce the fascia until you reach the depth of eight finger widths, which is where the clear fluid lies; after that, extract the core material, and this instrument should resemble the following shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is similar to a silver blade of subtlety, and it is made of iron or copper wire lightweight, and in the part below the small hole; and when it leans from one side, there are three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another. The head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top above it is the pulsation that comes to the water, then immediately turn toward the instrument; empty either half or a third of it, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance you might kill the patient due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, where he starts sweating, or approaches death. But emptied according to the quantity of its vitality and according to what the disposition of the vitality of the sick person signifies, and their hairs; then handle the instrument and keep hold of the water, which is now held by the keel that blocks the hole above the sifter as I have mentioned before, so you pierce in this manner; then resume with the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering like that, and draw out a small quantity of water. Do this each day, and be careful not to overdo it until he rests but just a bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 If you doubt about the patient and leave him much water, if his care is by burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing in sunlight, and dyed with drink; and healing with desiccative medicines until sane, and cauterization over the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For prevention of erection
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 At no time is a child born without an opening in the penis, or if the opening is small, or it's not at its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it becomes necessary quickly that he be pierced all over his body extremely finely according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put in him a very fine hole with a plug and keep it closed this way for three or four days until he makes urine; then remove the plug, and let him pass urine, and then replace it; but perhaps there's no need to do so because the urine that comes out does not close up.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 Those whose foreskin is tight should have a medical procedure on the penis bone as we have said, so it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are fixed, because none are born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate due to the matter not reaching the testicles, which is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this procedure is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum similarly to the size of a pen, so that the foreskin can be cut away as needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, then apply the sealant that stops the flowing blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come these swellings in the penis, and there is an ugly appearance of wounds; among them are malignant and benign ones; it is necessary to pluck them with a fine needle, then cleanse and purify all, then cover with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with refined oil until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of filthy colour and leaking fluid, it requires that you perform a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have copulated it, and if the ulcer is on the top of the penis, both inside the hair and outside near the base, then one must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it has healed, treat the area above.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat them together, the head of the phallus must not be perforated, and darkness and corruption come to it; then all that is blackened and corrupted should be treated with a plaster made from pumpkin bark and wheat flour mixed in honey, followed by other remedies until healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, prepare the moon caustic according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The caustics have two uses together: for bleeding and corruption; if the head of the phallus is corrupted and retracted, you should fill it with a piece of linen soaked in urine for the patient to pee into, then when hairs grow around its tip from wounds or abscesses, use an instrument called a "chaveit" to scrape until all are removed, freeing the head of the phallus completely; and if this is too severe, gently scraped with a spatula on the top of the phallus and pubic area. Then carefully separate it into two halves and place a fine linen bandage soaked in cold water between them, not immediately touching each other.
de la circoncision	On circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not necessarily a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it must be done the best way, and in the easiest manner for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision between one day and three days, and at all times; they were buried with two sheets, and occasionally, the coffin was placed above and below the body.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it recovers with copper, and the pain is doubled, and at the disfigurement which is hard to assure are not the tips of the member; and at the manicuring of the nail by chance slips away the iron, causing infection, and many times arise thus there is no need for further treatment as I have observed.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the manicuring done with force throughout all parts of the line I have found the benefit of experimentation, for the forces cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, cut equally all around; but ensure the cord is tightly wound; and the manner of the first operation should be such that it seems to the child as if you are merely tying a string around their penis for just a moment, then allow them relief in all ways possible; then keep the member straight between your hands, reassuring the strength returns without letting the child see any strains or movements; then place your hand on the rod and blow or cough, raising it as high as the head of the rod is extended; then cleanse thoroughly from any filth assembled therein; then tie off with a double thread at the knot, tying below one point to another attachment; and secure it using two strings through the scrotum by weaving them together, then separate the ends through the ring, coating between the two strands; then gently pull on the head of the rod; then let blood flow slowly as little as possible since this is a minor injury; and apply powder above and below it mixed with glue from a molded egg yolk cooked without water, combined with rose oil, good quality olive oil, and leave until the following day, treating again for other injcuires until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces in cleansing is this: both eyes are held and made sharp, and they should be as large as possible.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	If the issue of inflammation is when the kernel inside escapes during incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so too does the head make an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your fingernail, then with tweezeboarers, and thereafter bandage.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three days, and that which is from beneath the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has soothed; gently scrape it off; bandage as you move, and protect the area of the rod, for it will not do harm in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore heal the sudden wounds of powder that we have mentioned in treating powders, and if you bandage too much, and it goes beyond, it will not harm; heal as we have said until they are healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, frozen blood, bowel, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow and you observe the retention caused by the stone located at the bladder neck or urethra base, then it is necessary for the patient to be bedridden with his knees bent; and let him lie on his back, stretching his belly towards the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and then you must exert pressure on the bladder neck causing urine release from above, so that urine is flowed out; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary to administer extraction with all the tools called "catheter", of which here is the form: made of finely hammered silver wire, like bird feathers; and its diameter should be one palm wide half, and very thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The manner of relieving the issue with urination is to take a double thread and tie it at one end with a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert this into the catheter tube; remove excess wool up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and balm of aloes, have the sick person sit on a stool, and apply oily oil and olive oil to their bladder and penis. Then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches near the base at the root, then extend the tube upwards towards the scrotum; next insert the syringe past this point up to the bladamoor, then sense when the patient feels a voiding sensation before reaching their empty urinary reservoir. If not done according to order because the conduit has been twisted, extend the thread little by little so that urine follows it and remove it once emptied; start again until the bladder is completely drained, then relieve the sick person of discomfort.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are wounds or blood in the bladder, and decay has gathered there, and you see it needs to be cleansed with waters and medicines, so do all on the instrument called "clenched fist". And this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; the upper valve through which medicinal matter should be squeezed out well so that the shaft extends sensuously without addition, if possible to extract moisture, and insert as needed; and when you see your medicines in the bladder, place the head of a catheter into the moisture, and draw through the tube that is there; from the tube you will extract the moisture with a catheter, then firmly reset it back in; thus the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of the enema by which we cleanse the bladder: this is how.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and from beneath between his shoulders the ligaments tear; then take a sheep bladder and place the moisture inside so that you may use to cleanse the bladerocky nails, then wrap the sinew around twice forming a good double thread, and heat it slightly over fire; then insert the head into the enema, then hold your hand on the bladder allowing all the moisture to reach it; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle with it, and puncture it roundly through; then thread a strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle as one would mend a net, and put in what you wish with oil, moisture, and water, and secure it within the instrument; and do so as if you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladerocky.
de la piere	Of stone removal
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and extraction along with medicines; we also described the difference between stones placed by rain, all signs, and where one must operate on sizeable stones; as well as within the bladder and penis; I will now clearly and briefly explain to you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones placed within the bladwarthey occur more often in children and it is a sign of urine flowing from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there are sand-like substances, and graininess in their penises, and they frequently pass them, then become lodged; and many suffer these stone movements; healing for children is relatively easy until they have reached four years of age, but it becomes very severe with adults and moderate for those between youth and old age; the treatment of larger stones is easier than that of smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema in order to expel all filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For sometimes it causes blockage of stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by hand and stand him up to move backwards, so that the stone descends towards the front of the bladastery, and sometimes comes out from below; then make the patient sit between your hands properly, with their hands behind their thighs so that the bladastery is completely inclined forward; then grasp and touch inside. If you feel the stone in its place, hurry to cut into it now.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not come out with the probe, moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is young or of middle age, and do so with your middle finger if they are mature; then press on its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, insert it to the neck of the bladastery; then apply pressure with your finger, and move it out as you saw.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend the nails of his right hand upward, and to remove the skin from under the nails on his left hand in the part where one makes an incision; then he applies the spatula copiously, which forms it.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And they form between the one who is between the hips and the base, not in the middle but along the left side of the neck; and it is straight above the shoulder blade, and the hands are thus close or to the base, and the body has a hole so that it is wide at the front due to deficiency, and internally narrow, according to the amount of stone, not too large; perhaps pressing on the hand that is by the base or foundation, making them move easily without pain; and know that there may be part of the stone or corners and edges: they are easier to remove; and if a part rests on itself, similar to a glint, and round, from which it is easily removed.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 If there are angles and borders, make the hole larger; and if it does not come out, then it is necessary to use pincers similar to a file on its head, in order to extract the stone without slipping; or strike with a delicate instrument curved at the top; and if you cannot manage this way, enlarge slightly the exit opening, and if it becomes calcified, strain with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first remove the largest near the bladder neck, then towards the front, then the long one, and afterwards any smaller ones that remain.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then one must suck it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For there are two things that happen to the patient: either they die or urine returns through a gap where the flesh cannot heal; however, always strive with traction and debridement using forceps until you have cleaned the wound in pieces; after completing your work, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, along with pressure, and place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar or oil, rose water, and cold water to cool the abscess. Then dress the patient on their bed, without loosening the bandage until the fourth day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you reset it, it is raised well with oil and water, then treated with the final diafinitus ointment and basilisk ointment until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 When an abscess comes into the wound and causes corrosions and clotting of blood in the bladder, leading to retention of urine which is known by its lack of bubbling with urine: then place your finger in the wound, extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause inflammation in the bladastereum and pelvis; then cleanse the wound of water and debris and hair, and aid him in all ways you know how until he is healthy; and it is necessary to tie both his thighs and apply remedies at its location.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the stone is small and it moves from the penis, and protrudes inside, and urine cannot pass; treat as I have described before, by dilating many times using this method of treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already found such a case.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this shape and make it with three sharpened edges in one section:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a filament and wrap it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then insert the probe gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; rotate the probe slowly in your hand against the stone from the other side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand where the remnant of the stone is lodged within the sheath.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is soon broken and expelled with urine, the patient will be relieved; and if you cannot do this due to any obstruction, then tie a filament below the stone and another above, then cut the sheath at the location of the stone between the two ligatures, then extract the stone forcefully, loosen the ligature, and cleanse the clotted blood in the wound; cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	From women's stones (likely referring to uterine fibroids or other related conditions).
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones are found in women'wart hilt, and if it happens even once, the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second reason is that they cannot find a skilled woman who can undress before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third way is that sometimes one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the stone from the woman is more embedded than the man's, it requires a deeper cut and great fear is involved. And if necessary, seek such help as you can, ensuring that you choose an experienced midwife without charge, or if not found, a very skilled wise-woman; and present to her one who is knowledgeable in women's affairs or a woman skilled in part of the art, and command her to carry out what you order regarding the exploration of the stone; and look carefully to see that the woman is a virgin: then it is proper for him to position his foot or base correctly and search for the stone. If she finds it, she should be constrained from under her base, and he advises her to place her foot or with the patient, gently pressing her left hand against the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is torn, then you must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place it on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the hollow of the knee where it appears misplaced, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move its joint above or below the stone, but take hold with your hands gently; then insert a probe into the opening. If you sense the stone so adjust the wound until the stone can be expelled forcefully, and know that there are many types of stones: they come in various sizes, sharp or blunt, stuck or loose, long or round, some with veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you touch the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If the stone does not yield, then apply vitriol paste and hold for an hour until it becomes fixed; then return to your work as long as the stone is firm, and have the supports that I told you about in removing stones from homes to assist you in your work; if the stone still does not yield, and it is a vein that is clotted, apply powder at its location and strain with threads and bandages, do not attempt again, let the stone remain undisturbed unless the patient dies, then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb has regained its strength, return to your practice until the wound is healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia due to fleshly protrusion
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Immediately following a urination is not anything else but an assembly of moisture or white faeces, which is below the head of the kidneys that contains the urethra; and it is called "faeces", and never properly in the tissue of the urethra, as one might think it to be another organ; and it is the leather of the kidney between the white faeces we have mentioned; and this does not occur often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this urine is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and it spreads throughout those tissues.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And never allow for puncture near the joints, and this discoloration comes in many forms: it may be yellowing, lack of redness, blackness, or white water-like appearance; these signs are to recognize this assembly because if they are as we described (white pus), they indicate abscesses, with a short duration like that of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it is completely moist.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If there is moisture in the proper tissue, then abscesses form with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it's another organ; and if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white flesh, they feel it all over; therefore, when you see to discern the color of the moisture, try everywhere in the middle part, from which the shape was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the introduction, judge accordingly.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat it with iron, one must make the patient clean according to their ability and fullness of their body; then they lie on their back, near something slightly high, and covered with many cloths; then you sit beside them on the left, and command your assistant to sit on the right, and extend a rod towards one of the two ribs between the joint's curve; then take the surgical sponge, and scrape the leather of the rib along its length up to near the wrist, making the incision straight considering the curve of the rib until reaching the white fascia, carefully peeling it as best you can; then pierce the fascia cleanly with a wide hole, drain all the fluid, and place your fingers, stretching the fascia away; do not touch the joint's head but only the fascia; cut through or in pieces equally well the ribcage of them subtly, so that if you don't cut it properly, the fluid will return; and if the flesh leaks from your work, rejoin the two lobes of the rib when you have completed the operation on the fascia; then suture the two parts of the rib joint like other wounds until they are healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint to be affected by another disease, it is necessary that you bind all the vessels that are hanging loosely, suspecting bleeding; then cut out the bone head entirely and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if the limb is joined in two parts together, identify that these are two branches; then bind the other part as you did with the first one equally, then extract any blood from the wound and apply linen soaked in rose oil to it; then place another moistened linen infused with wine and oil over it, and position two layers of quilted cloths on top, securing them according to this method.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two quilted cloths and patch them with shredded wool following this pattern and sew them together at the waistline of trousers, one head reaching from the base to the back, and the other towards the thumb area; and the second pair over both elbows, then securely stitch everything in place. This treatment for wound cauterization requires no iron knife, instead take a delicate cautery tool and treat the skin of the joints as we have described before, so that the white matter containing the blood is revealed; then use the cautery according to this method, puncture those veins with fine needles, and scorch them with this sharp caster:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 In all the ways you know how to do it until everything is treated; and ensure that the fire does not touch the vein; and understand that this work is more healing; and with care for blood flow regulation, and changes in cutting size; and if anything opposes you or abscesses or blood flow issues or other things arise, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrifying nature, proceed with perforation as I instruct you, and that when you are certain by the meanings we have said about rehydrating being necessary, make the patient sit on a chair raised; then pierce the abscess at the part below all the swelling broadly, place the perforation along its length of body; and leave wide openings for water to flow freely; then apply cotton there, bind it, and let the remaining hydration drain out, then treat until the wound is healed; if a bandage does not allow fluid to escape through the opening in the wound, you must insert a tube or instrument used for draining fluids from hydrocephalus as described earlier; enlarge the wound and understand that fluid will return, gathering after six months or so, and when it has gathered, just like before, then the patient's health will improve.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of boils
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In this part of the treatise on gangrene, there are various fearsome conditions that make it seem best to leave them alone; and I will tell you about the procedure and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the joints; and this is quite often seen.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is to know that by excess of bitter and ague, spread through the veins or caused by percussion; the color of an abscess corresponds with the natural skin tone; there is no pain, it's a serious abscess; sometimes it may be frightening, pus-filled, and of vivid color without any signs from us such as artery bleeding or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from our artery, you recognize the abscess by its hot appearance when pressed with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 He who is characterized by veinous swelling can be known from his disposition to expressing upon touch of the joints; he may well make an incision in this manner and others; then cut out the head of the gland, so that it remains high, and treat the white facies, and release the suspensory muscles on all sides of the gland.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the gland is already soaked with these nodes, then one must incise and cut out the gland; and if it is hard at the white facies, or within those contained in vessels, then you must release all of that tissue entirely, and roundly excise it.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if a stone's birth is behind it or there, one must completely remove the stone and extract its contents as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are completed, dress the wound with lin cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped in a wrapping resembling a bud, with the softening of tissues, and the patient moves greatly when it approaches; and the treatment for this disease is as fearsome as that previously mentioned, so we will direct you to its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory under his knees, touching all the veins close to the thighs, and tint the master's points, and stretch them fully; then cover with a wide sharp tranchet over the entire area of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle where it has double thread, and tie it at the first spot where blood was seen, and tie tightly to the other end; then cut cleanly within, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted moisture; then dress the wound as with bow-wounds, ensuring that none of the vessels bleed out from either joint; for by this no harm comes, and wherever blood appears in all the vessels, it is necessary to tie off both joints; so the ears do not lose their hearing due to vessel cutting, healing and cannot be aided.
de la routure dou syfac	For this swelling due to a snakebite
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The outcomes of this branch are due to the section that occurs from blows or strains in the abdominal area near the shoulders, causing the intestines to protrude into one of the legs; and this protrusion is either from a blow or a strain, and these two methods come from many causes: by impact, jumping, screaming, or lifting heavy objects, and similar things; and the signs when it's due to a strain are that it happens little by little over long periods, not suddenly; and boils appear equally towards the front because the strain pushes the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to a cut sigh, which causes sudden pain at first, and various boils appear close to the skin, from below the hair, as an issue of the intestine and in all parts affected by the sigh.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	In; If youre bon's ct; f.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And for these iron treatments of fear, one must dispel them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of treatment is that you command the patient to cleanse their intestines with their hand inside the wound if it can be retracted; then grip the anus between your hands, lift the buttocks; then extend the head towards the top and strip all the skin around the thighs as much as needed to open the wound, and use those scoops from where you have need by which lice can come out; then scrape off the white sores that are still uncured on all sides. Afterwards, put your index finger into what is between the first white sore under the thigh skin and the second one, in between the two whitish sores, and remove anything behind the flesh; and pull with your right hand inside the head of the thighs, and lift up the first white sore on top to your left hand, and stretch all the white sores towards the belly. Then command your minister to extend it upwards, and remove whatever is behind the connection; and grab hold with both hands if there is any intestine wrapped or hardened white sore present, and if you find anything like that in the abdomen below; then take a needle of about one thread made from four threads and insert it into the back part of the sores, which is after the thigh skin. After the belly button, cut off all hairs that are seen with the threads, until there are four strands; then tie them together in a cross shape, and bind up the sores under the thigh skin as we have described before, using two strong ligatures. Then wrap the ends of the threads around the sores so tightly that no piece of flesh can enter or exit without an ulcer occurrizing. Finally, place the first binding along with the second one lengthwise along both hands, and in accordance to this first long strip on each side, then leave space for a finger behind the sore over the thighs; and after these two strips apply it as roundly as the wound carries. Then cut off any skin that is not smoothed or swolled, and follow what we have said before; finally, treat with pounded linen soaked in oil on wounds, and place the binding which we described earlier.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauldrated the white scab that we have mentioned, after incision, out of fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens, leaving the ligament until it heals by itself; and if it delays in healing, apply warm water as we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healthy again.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia due to fleshly protrusion
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone daring to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a joint that is assembled with a screw, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting above lightly beneath; then cover yourself and treat the abscess from what works, until the vessels heal; and treat it as we have said, until it becomes completely healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Never occurs a rupture of the kidneys as we have said and opening the eyes; and no digestion issues from the joints, and if it does, it is not much, and they all heal quickly; and anyway, if it remains for too long at this point, the wound or syphilis develops until the intestines leak out; and this happens by the extension of the swelling in the kidneys as we have said because it is stretched, then the eyes become softened and puffy, open and exposed; and you treat it with cautery as we have previously stated; and never treated with iron in this manner: that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cuts the swolebag of rupture to a width according to the quantity of three arrows; and then extract the syphilis underneath the skin layer, then take the wire and place it over the ruptured area near the syphilis head, and press on both sides of the head with the wire; then extract the top part of the wire, but do not cover or expand the swelling nor anything else as I have instructed in treating a fracture of the intestines; then treat it using wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bind the wounds, if they swell up and treat the injury, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is constricted, and does not have an appearance in the dressing, and the cautery has healed at this place, and closer to recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From softening of the leather of joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of joints is softened in certain individuals because their internal structures are mollified, and fluid can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat them, that they lie on their back while the area affected by softening is covered with skin, then join the two edges together using a stitch, and if you look first remove the excess leather in three or four firm stitches; then sew between the stitches as with other wounds until it heals, and let them sneeze.
dou chastrement	In the art of surgery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 It is said that these shocks are recognized in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of them in this book; they are only necessary for two reasons: one so that the physicians may answer when asked about them, and treat them accordingly; and the other, because we often need a form of treatment for certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cows, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say that shocks are caused in two ways: by attraction or by penetration.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In that which we do by attraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its hoofs are softened and pliable; then press with your hand until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the act of tailing: it is necessary to grasp the beast, and press the skin of the hocks in your left hand, then tie the suspensorium, and bandage each foot individually after you have properly scalded them; and leave no spot unblemished or the subtle sore that is under the sole; and this manner of tailing is different from those done by attraction, because with attraction there may be nothing in the hocks so the animal seeks to lie down; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are those with both male and female characteristics.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 A hermaphrodite is in two ways at home: one where between the two testicles it appears as if of the form of a woman's nature, and there may be hair or sometimes in the same place they urinate.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another manner is found in women, with pain at the wrist similar to that of an erect penis.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for men and women is that you remove any swollen veins completely, and treat them as other wounds would be treated; in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks from their penile sheaths, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Of the inflammation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A thorned vein is a swoln vein on the natural part, so much that it's too ugly to look at; and many women have it as large as an open hand, and this is its remedy.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you trim the excess of the thorned vein with your hand or fingernails gently; and do not cut too deeply, so as to avoid bleeding, then cure it further until healthy; and for another vein found at the mouth of a muscle, and its attachment, and occasionally bursts forth, and is like a cow's udders, which was called by the ancients "kowie disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to treat it as we have described in the attempt, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratic refers to something that lacks a fixed direction or pattern; in medicine, this could refer to symptoms or conditions that manifest unpredictably or without clear causality. The specific translation of the term may vary depending on its usage within the context of a medical text from the Middle Ages. However, since "de erratique" is not a standard phrase or word in Old French medical terminology, it might be necessary to clarify that this appears to be an isolated term without further information available for accurate translation. If "erratique" is intended to mean erratic behavior or symptoms within the text, the translation could be:
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of a woman is not fully perceived, or if her pelvis is small; it is natural by birth, or by disease that has come upon her; or it is due to a narrow uterus, or a subtle syphilis or anaesthesia, and is formed in front from the mares, or sides, or rear, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly bearing children; and knowledge of this comes by observing her menstrual cycle.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the hemorrhages are recent, appearing on the hands or face.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a subtle syphilis and it has progressed to two years, act quickly: place your two index fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then extend the two fingers fully, until the subtle syphilis wound heals, and cover it with dressings; then take flax, grind it into oil, and apply it to the ulcer each day, so that it cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilis is hard and has spread, one must dress the affected area with a leaf-like sprig of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the ulcer is of tar, anoint it with onion and dress it; then have healing herbs like acacia blood, dragon's blood, incense, abundant wax together; then prepare a wide linen bandage so that the wound cannot close; and thus let it be long-term, and make another lint tent; then continue with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 When a thorn enters the thumb, then it must be covered according to this method, unless there are advanced abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an advanced abscess in the thumb, do not touch with fire.
des emorroides	For hemorrhoids:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Morrays are abnormal veins without customary costumes, and when morrays become old they harden; as we have described in the division of those mentioned earlier, their signs, and I will now say which ones receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that morrays and hardening in the thumb are fully within the skin, and they do not appear to touch when felt, except for treatment by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the thumb can be touched and treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Then it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the bone with pincers, and tie the wound at its roots, then powder with restraining medicines like dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour its feet into boiling water for an hour, then place it in very cold water; if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of red apples and haws and other things, and then take flour of barley, and mix with honey and oil, and apply as a poultice on its back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it becomes entangled, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, apply warm suction cups to the back and along the ribs without causing pain; then take lamb's wool, and the hair in juice of plantain or juice of elderberry with wine aged, and apply at the site.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess is healed, treat it with ointment until it becomes healthy again; and if it appears "albathir," which means red, resembling a harsh chief, then cover as I have explained previously in the booklet; then continue treatment until it becomes healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	From abscesses of the muscles
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many ways of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as chancres and deep abscesses, herpes, itching diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other illnesses that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 It is necessary to explain in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs on the bone called marrow; and if you want to know how to handle it with iron, observe whether the abscess begins its onset warmly and feverish, and red if you see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hasten to puncture it too soon but let the pain be alleviated first; then have the patient sit on a chair with two small pillows for support, and rest their head back while assembling their legs so that the injured parts are below; spread out his hips, place arms under knees and secure them well with a good bandage; then position the patient towards the right side and adjust the instrument used in working on the mouth of the marrow, from which later comes the shape; it is necessary that when you see the instrument properly placed, insert the rod to check the depth of the marrow so that what enters through the instrument does not penetrate too far but as much as it should and does not hurt the patient. And if the protrusions are larger, then cover the depth of the marrow with a fabric so that the protrusments do not damage them; put the tip of the instrument upwards, and dye the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 When abscesses are opened and they are treated with much handwork, if it is necessary to cover the chief area, use cotton wool for the sputum leakage or olive oil; place the poultice on the forefront of the bone, then put it over the marrow and at the end of the joint, using clean moistened gauze with warm water or honey that have been cooked well; afterwards cure after two days of applying salve until healed; occasionally elevate the bone and wound through an enema of water and honey, then with water or roots of lily and aristolochia soaked long enough to be cooked; then return to ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed over a bone, it must be treated without using iron, but care for it as we have said in the section on treatment.
de l’enfantement	from the medieval medical textbook on wound care: When treating an aposteme les boil, and keep it is healed; after which treatment was used to be treated. If a fistulae treat, if necessary when. And with pus abscesses are infected and other conditions of as perforation. Infected, the wound cleaning the lanced. Then bandage apply poultaceaux.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It's necessary at birth to know the natural childbirth figure, and the signs when a woman is in labor and desires her urine odor: then you must hurry for the baby to be born; thus it is that these childbirths are according to the natural pattern, with the first issue from its head and the second following immediately afterward. When you see these signs, one should gently press on her abdomen so that the baby comes out soon because when they emerge above their head, the second follows as well, and there is an evacuation of superfluous blood by good cleansing; those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At times it comes upon his feet, and affects the body or head, and hands, coming upon his belly or sides, sometimes turned by chance around his neck, and other malformed shapes; therefore, to heal properly, you must be wise and subtle in these matters, avoiding errors and deceit, and I will show you all the forms as how one should assist him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally with its head first and the woman labours heavily, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and let her nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then give the midwife between her thumbs the small spatula in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And breaks the second bone, and cleans it of moisture that lies within; then presses the woman's abdomen until the child descends, if not, you should administer an enema to the woman with a muscatel water infusion from fenugreek seeds mixed with sesame oil; afterwards, pinch and induce vomiting under this condition, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now proceed to deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two arms come forth, one must gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot be inserted, place a seat under her, and lift her feet upwards; then stand the seat on the ground, support the woman so she does not fall backward; and if the hands cannot be reinserted, and the child dies, clothe the hands with a bandage as previously instructed, and extract the child, resetting it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From the exit of the child through its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out through its feet, one must push it upwards; then gradually turn it little by little until it is level; then pinch both feet and extend them slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it reaches as far as the thighs, if it commands to press, and causes sneezing due to its condition; if it jumps up, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not far as we have said, if you turn little by little until it returns to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Once done with ease.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come up as we have described, then take musk of high quality, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; then apply this ointment to the woman's body inside and out, let her sit in cold water until below the ribs; and when she becomes pale beneath, place a mirror of mirra underneath, leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and lightly rub her belly, as now the child will jump.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of a child dislocated on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this condition, the midwife places her hands little by little; then lie him on his back, and let down his feet, and he should be lying next to a bed; gently bend his hands little by little, then press the hands over his belly, and raise the pillows from underne. until it is aligned properly; and if the child does not cry, straighten the legs fully, then move the belly forward, then push with your hands; gradually move the child a bit at a time; and command the woman to squeeze until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the passage of the child, take out a handful with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 One must engineer to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go; if she cannot stand, lie her on a bed with legs fully extended; then prepare the muscular apparatus as described earlier; if she does not give birth, have her sit on a chair, then study how to return the hand; and gradually move the child according to natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command that she continue to push until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the dislocation of the child's head near its neck, and let his hands spread out, and turn his face toward his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is required that the barber dyes his hand, then twists it slightly and gently rubs; and when they are equalized, apply to the nature of musk and oil as we have said, and command that it moves slightly; and after doing so, make it sit on a chair, and command that it bends; then induce sneezing.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for everything in the second instance
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes in this manner to the second joint, bandage the knuckle with your finger until the moisture is dried; and if there are any swellings on his face or neck, do not keep them bound, let the swelling move freely; then insert the child inside, as you have placed it correctly, and command the woman to bend occasionally: then gently massage.
de l’issue des gemelz	;t e-cons that he;l's o :le t in: igne they for the boflesh by they don's ; you to the translation is a s.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Sores often arise many times, and sometimes they appear three or four at once; it is not an extraordinary thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that do not live if they lack water, but when present, they multiply and can be dispelled by the syphax who steals them, which is linked to the bubo; and sometimes they emerge as naturally as one does after bowel movements, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they emerge suddenly, and the treatment is done as we have said, and with subtle healers, and quickly makes what needs to be made; so it does good as well.
de plusors enfans	and many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are never formed in marriages I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they take the form of a child by measuring with the glorious sage's scale; it is fitting that the healer knows all this, for on occasion similar things happen; thus do as it should be done.
de l’enfant mort	of a child who has passed away
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat a woman who has given birth to a stillborn or is pregnant as I have said in the division, and there are no contractions, and you must perform work with your hands; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound mind, and does not have an accident or fears death; it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, with her head hanging down and legs raised; then touch the navel area from two sides so she is positioned away from the bed to avoid treatment at the baby's descent; then rub the mouth of the muscle with moistened oils mixed with musk extract and fenugreek seeds, linseed oil; then anoint her hands with these oils and musk extracts; then apply them gently on the area, and let her put in a small amount that is suitable for this use, and be careful if the baby is positioned appropriaturately to descend under its head; then insert the pessary into her vagina or anus, or any other appropriate place we have mentioned, until it achieves its purpose.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then place against the other occiput where you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then extend equally while moving from one side to the other, in order for them to emerge, and let the occipital bones be sharpened to hold in place, as shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if one remains stuck in a part, anoint the patient's two oiled fingers and insert them into that area, while pulling the other part; and if none remain, place this occiput or higher, and turn as much until they all come out smoothly.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought together by grasping, it is necessary to wrap above the sleeve until it slides completely; then pull at the joints of the sole or knee, thus you must do so for the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is swolebreak and assembled at one end, or if it has an acute angle, you must push a spatula-like splinter between your two fingers, bend the skull, and extract water; or pull with an instrument called "almidach," from which form comes along with other treatments or chapters as mentioned here; thus also make the child have a large head naturally. Then heat the bones with tongs, and if the head springs back forcefully, split until the moisture that is out of place emerges; and if it cannot come out, crush by hand into pieces where you can manage to do so; and if swollen in the belly or under the ribs, pierce with a needle until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is over its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the calf bone is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is difficult in the belly or udder, it is appropriate to stretch it with a drape wrapped around by hand; and massage the belly or udder until the moisture is gone; and if other members are cramped, and the head remains attached, then they should use their full hand inside of marrow, and pull up to the mouth of the marrow; then they insert a thorn or spur, and twist forcefully; and if the opening of the marrow is blocked due to an abscess that has come in, it does not require diligent treatment, rather it requires applying moist and fatty substances; and afterward apply ointments, and sew with soft water-soaked and moistening linen.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 If the child is on his back, and you can put him upright, prepare as we have described in the living child; if they cannot be moved, support them carefully by sections, leaving nothing of the sacrum.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And once you have done this, if they require the treatments as we have described for boils that come in the bone marrow; and if bleeding occurs, apply a tight bandage, and provide other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead while the other was alive and unharmed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time an abscess appeared in her thigh, and it swelled so much that it covered the area, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	byt.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place on strong attraction and extract one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I greatly doubted because it has a belly without bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	the ocul;
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I want to heal the wound, and treat hand injuries until she is much better; it lasted for long time like this, and then remained somewhat strong at rest; I remember these procedures well because when masters discover something strange, they try to apply aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	in returning the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of the pressure, to which one attaches the books; and at two turns with two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 However, the horn should be more subtle in restriction and made of iron or boxwood; and the mouth of the vice must be wide, with margins of trees one palm and a half long; within these two joints there are two adjustments of the same piece, which are firmly fixed on either end, each being an additional half palm long or slightly more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouths of bolts for turning when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in construction made of ironwood or boxwood depending on the appearance of pincers; and it has two horns with adjustments one palm long each, which are a half-palm wide; when you see opening the instrument completely while sitting astride an object, place your hands and legs extended then insert both adjustments together into the instrument's mouth, holding its head between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as if turning pincers equally, according to the amount seen opening the mouth of the instrument until she makes it do what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all made of bronze, and it has multiple forms; and the more skilled they are in making them, the faster the work, and higher at home for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	byud? (th; so much; And you or not, they have.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the testicles are retained during childbirth, you must command the patient to grasp his foreskin, and then perform circumcision under this condition, restraining the hands around the mouth and nose; and if it slips through here, that is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, then take a knife and make an opening or use a cork, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the quail (testicle), such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, parsley, and centaury; all these herbs, alone or in combination, are cooked or boiled with water over fire; then put a cover or cork on the pot, place the other head into the mouth of the quail (testicle), and seal it until vapors come out from the testicle; then perform circumcision as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his second condition is a stabbing pain.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it remains after this treatment and is not cured, instruct the bailiff to moisten his left hand with oil of semeun or musk water, then insert it into nature, and if he wishes for a second time; and when he has found it, pinch and extend slightly straight so that the tendon does not pop out during extraction; but move it gently right and left, then pull. It will come out and loosen up.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the tendon is stretched out, we have said the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; if it does not improve from all that we have suggested, ensure you do not strain while urinating; but it must be done so that what is at the mouth of the tendon should be tied to the thighs of a woman, then enema with ointment tetrapharmacistically; this will help and make it strong again. However, if it emits bad odor from the stomach and head when urinaturally expelled, it causes nausea in the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then you should conduct incense-laden smoke in this manner: none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with rosemary and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for retaining childbirth fluids and afterpains is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is like a snake's appearance with the head placed delicately in nature, and wide shoulders above fire; there are fumigations over the embers, and lichen until it is consumed, then begin anew.
de percier lou fondement	Of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Children are born who do not possess the foundation but have a subtle duct: therefore it is fitting for the healer to pierce that duct at its proper place and not the spinal canal or gut, and ensure no laceration occurs; then apply moistened cloths in wine and oil, followed by ointment until they are cured.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it pops out again, then place a woolen cloth over the joint and let it rest for several days, until the child is ready to walk in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this swelling from suturing a wound or an abscess does not occur; if it needs to be re-sutured: use the treatment with the woolen cloth as we have mentioned before.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas originating below the foundation grow and emerge near the lower foundation or within two parts of space; if an old nodulation is present, it operates, producing moist bile or subtle bowels, and these fistulas never occur simultaneously; they are known by what happens to the patient through discharge or flatulence when the sick person has a discharge, and sometimes a sudden stool.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	bessibly; t or in-Faluire ; by his le oucfe; aont so thatn the coleze and other; < kori's at est en the maine m. êtes crates if they.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And so you find the persistent pus at the base (of something), and it is not spreading: then take your index finger or thumb, and insert a fine needle of willow bark or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twisting, then you insert a fine thread or horse hair with your finger until you feel the thread or hair on your fingertip; and if you do not feel it, nor any leakage of gas or wind as we have said: believe that it does not puncture.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or urethra, allowing urine to pass through it and cannot be controlled by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced to the hip joint, then the thread appears up close; if there is no twisting and the pain subsides at the incision, then you must pull it back out completely, and there is neither medicine nor treatment with salve; in these persistent pus-filled fistules there is no better cure than labor, and vanity of foolish men who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In cases that are not fraught with fear and are not of longstanding, hoping for healing by way of iron as I have experienced it; and the patient lies between your hands on his back; you lift his legs up to his thighs, keeping his thighs angled toward his stomach; then place a tent made of linen or cloth if there is twisting, until you know where the tenting comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels discomfort in the lower abdomen, it is necessary for you to place your index and middle finger there, if at once he perceives the tenting; and whether exposed or between your fingers lies a sac or a vein, then you know it's fraugwarted; do not disturb it unless it cannot be treated.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 At all times it can be properly healed, but this happens rarely; and the aid used depends on how one applies the subtle caustic according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned; and pours hot oil into the fistula until nearing the base; doing so two or three times, ensuring that these charred pieces resemble a feather from a bird; then treat with a mixture of butter on bandages until those charred pieces come away, followed by treatment with ointment nourishing both and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, that's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If not otherwise healed, that cannot be; and if it tries to pass through, but does not reach the base or foundation, create a thick cover between your teeth and the tent using charcoal or sycamore bark, observing where the fistula breaks out underneath this covering. Start cauterizing near the beginning of the fistula, then pour on continuously before reaching the tent; continue causticization afterward until it reaches the top of the tent; and when freed from the tent, it will fall off; then remove those charred pieces that resemble a bird's feather and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If the vein is won, cut between you and the flesh, then cauterize with fire or medicinal herbs.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery combines two things: it stops the bleeding of adjacent wounds and prevents the evacuation of moisture; then it treats dirty sloughs with oil or ground cloth, until the wound is thoroughly dried out, after which it heals the abscesses caused by strong ointments applied directly to the flesh. Then the treatments are completed once the medicines have had time to take effect.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it heals well and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	the ch: :e cra�[S:
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you find the slough and within it is loose canvas or flesh that needs to be cut open, do not attempt it without confidence and hope through proper management of one of these three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or excise until bare bone, or if possible treat and heal as previously; just don't go too deep so you don't seal off the foundation area, allowing for natural evacuation when ready. Then proceed to cure it as we have instructed; perhaps it will be beneficial without needing to remove that layer of skin near the base or with another instrument prepared elsewhere; then assess any additional wound debris and cleanse what has been excised; finally, examine how best to restore the wound and maintain the fistula further from the foundation: this would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 At no time are there fistulas according to this method: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is close to the foundation near the skin above, so take a pierced tent in the shape of this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread of two lengths, and pushes the tentacle throughout the abscess until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pierced near the foundation within, then remove the thread from that perforation and push your finger or foundation through it; and twist the head of the thread, and bring together both heads, holding them tightly against each other, and leave for one or two days; do not release at any time until the threads hold what is between them and pull apart; then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess is not healed through drainage, it should be cut in all possible ways if it does not penetrate too deeply.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make a large incision at first, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spatulate splinter used to make a fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting on the other; however, not all should be torn as that which cannot or should not be torn.
des emorroydes	by.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Dislodgements occur in two ways: either within the foundation, like resin grains which can be small or large, causing blood to flow and having one or several of them, affecting both the foundation and its chief; but those that are dislodged have little moisture, and from there emerge a bit of yellow water or some blood, retaining their body color. The treatment for those within the foundation is such: command the patient to sneeze so they can enter chambers until the foundations fall out, and filaments are visible; if hastened, grasp it with pincers at your fingernail, then cut its roots; and if the pincers cannot hold due to moisture, grasp them by thread or cloth piece from a camel skin. Then extract between your fingers, clip, and powder over hot powders that are ready for cautery; or cauterize as described in the chapter on cautery, since it heals other wounds until they become healthy; and if foundations cannot fall out, clisterize the patient with a sharp, rough clister to cleanse what is at the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when patients sneeze, and filaments are firm at the foundation, then treatment is easy. So grasp them by your fingernail or pincers, clip, then treat as we have said until they become healthy, avoiding incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to dress the wound as follows: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pass the thread through from above and pierce the other side with the needle, turn the two loops of thread away from the needle, and make them wide; tighten the thread firmly, then moisten the thread, remove the needer, and do so for all others, leaving some excess blood to drain; then place a linen cloth smeared with rose oil or cerot on the base, put it in place, and command the patient to rest; then let it remain until they bleed, and when they have bled sufficiently, treat with ointment and other remedies until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Firstly the foundation or groundwork
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it frequently happens that there is blockage in the intestines and due to natural constraint, especially when illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape off the skin at the top of a stud or your fingernail that does not allow moisture; then cleanse until it is dry as needed; and if it cannot dry, resume scraping more vigorously than before, until it is thoroughly dry, and be scarified; then cleanse until it is sufficiently dry.
dou fremit	The heat of fire cauterization causes slight tremors.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A formication is a small faulty appearance around the body, and it spreads widely; and never does the blood turn blue, but the smell is like deathly shaking, and comes throughout the entire body, especially in the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that quill on the shaking area until it turns purple throughout; then turn your hand all over with the quill as you cover completely around the shaking area, spreading it widely, and scrape the shaking down to its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a chain of iron or steel in this manner, and be subtle below and traverse above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perceive with the eyes, but hold it in both hands and press it firmly; And if you see it, cauterize the tremor as if it were before or a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	the uue et:
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At no time is an enema made of silver or brass, or melted lead or molten metal; and at no time are these small and large suppositories prepared according to the substances they contain.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	However, those which are made in the treatment of children who are weak and sorrowful should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enema is as follows, depending on whether the belly is tied up in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and it has an opening or the stomach is tied up, as you see, and the chest is pierced inside; and have to one side two holes, and on the other side also. Apply the medicines of a bladder beast or parchment paper to the belly, and pierce all around through small holes, leaving space between each hole, then insert a strong thread made from twisted thread, surrounding it as in a goat's skin; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread at one end of the instrument, then perform an enema; and this is the circular form.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, apply oil or goose egg butter to the enema tip, then pour it gently; then guide the instrument with both hands together until it is fully inserted, then extract the enema, and allow the patient to lie on their back as the medicine flows out, as much as possible; and if they sleep through the night entirely, this provides greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema for a bowel disorder, and the medicine needs to be expelled quickly, repeat until he is healthy again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoid is at its foundation or abscess, then it should be treated with a subtle enema as for an infant; and that is the way to tighten the bowels during such a delicate enema.
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In the division of wound care, we have said previously; now let us discuss treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what causes or ways the wounds are made, and for what reasons they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things through which wounds are made include the cutting of stones and swords or spears, lances, bows, slings, or similar objects; or those made according to body parts, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, groin, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs. And I will tell you about the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds because memory serves in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's from a stone throw or similar things, and the skin is fully torn with large wounds, and you suspect a heated abscess: immediately treat the head region if there is little blood flow from the wound, apply the remedy opposite to the affected area; and avoid replenishing the patient with wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not need to be treated with meat, and drink no wine or eat any meat, place it on the wound; if an abscess comes from there, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil only, or in vinegar-infused wine; and if no hot abscess is present, apply it where the wound is fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air or dust, I will tell you something later on that; and if it has been moved, apply some ointments until healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, with edges that cannot be joined by stitches, join them by suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, in sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to bone, and sharp, and holds only slightly; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard-dry leather in its place, and instruct the patient to eat fatty meats like tested wheat, also as well cooked poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or skin rot, and it does not adhere to the bone, cut off all rotten flesh, then wash thoroughly with wine vinegar; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a clot, and cannot be stopped by medicines, try tying the artery; and if that doesn't work, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: apply this powder that dries just as salt causes things to move.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; lively chalk three parts, and grind finely, apply to wound, tightly bind, until it is well aired and joins all its blood; then wrap it up well, leaving no gaps unless it swells.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never perform this treatment solefly; when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the physician has not healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound has moved slightly, especially in this case, do not apply this powder but instead put on digested ointments or wheat flour made with water and honey until it heals; then continue with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if there is a fractured bone with the wound, and it is small, extract using fine tweezers; and I will tell you here about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	From a wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes from the neck and it is straightforward, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery in the neck are damaged.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, with no other remedy but to leave the wound; do not place anything constricting on them, as this harms and draws back the nerves; and do not put anything cold on the wound because the nature of the nerves is cold, and their continuation comes from the brain, which is the highest body member. However, use medicinal spices soaked in gently warmed water with rose oil, heated likewise in gently warmed water, and other mineral substances prepared in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages; then treat until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, either puncture them or place it lower; if the arrowhead is removed, and blood flow occurs, drain it, remove any clots, and cauterization may be necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and conduits are guarded, which determines how tissue moves, so adjust according to its natural shape; then apply a bandage immediately, leave for several days, then treat with medicated ointments until healed; and if there has been pressure on the bone from the wound, seek it out; and if there are fragments of bone, remove them entirely or those that you cannot get, let the wound crust over, cleanse, and close the opening; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder to the area I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones and a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	ete toun:
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the injury is deep, look to see if there are swellings around the area where the patient feels pain: then know that the wound is lethal; but if it's not deep and the entire blood supply is fresh, do not apply powder immediately nor bind with a bandage as the blood may flow out further, causing harm to the body; instead use an attracting ointment, and reapply twice in one day. If you don't have ointment, put some old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient rest on their back for three or four days, or longer; then there won't be any spasms, nor tremors of body pain or limb dislocations. And when you see good healing signs, know that the wound is cured.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat with bandages and other treatments until healed; and if it cannot be healed or worked upon, then determine that there is a fistula; perform the treatment as should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it's simple or located on the back, treat that which is in front; if it's large, with bandages; and if it's small, with powder, and if it's embedded in the bone, remove as much of the wound and foreign objects as possible; and if not, let the wound heal naturally, making the extractions easier; and for other wounds on different limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	During a rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The collapses of the abdomen are large and medium and small; from a great wound never emerges any intestine or nerves of the intestines, causing infiltration thereof; and suturing is more difficult, and never worse than a small wound, because when resetting the intestines they require more effort, unless they are reset gradually by heat; for the intestines swell almost immediately upon feeling cold, thus they return with greater force, and therefore a superficial wound moves easier, because one resettles the intestine to its place as do others. Also know that treatments of abdominal collapses come in four ways: common sutures occur on the abdomen's opening, and sutures from other body injuries and two specialized methods are also shared; nonetheboever these are more suited to the abdomen's opening, and I will describe each one individually.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and there are no issues with the internal organs to be concerned about, and only minor things need to be reset as we have said: either because of the size of the wound or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: by moistening with an sponge or a piece of cloth briefly soaked in hot water, or by pouring boiling vinegar and salt and pepper over the wound until the swelling subsides; do not repeat this process too often, and ensure to dry it out to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with warm or hot water as necessary because it allows passage for minimal matter; and if there is no entry, make a small incision using the instrument used to cauterize hemorrhoids; the first treatment is to dilate the opening, without any great need for cutting unless required: this is done by slicing inside the cavity and not towards it, then observing its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have burst forth, if you can reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, because this allows movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is large and located below the belly, it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back, with legs raised higher than their head; if it's below the belly, raise the head and hips higher than the lower parts, and similarly arrange in such a way that the wounded part is elevated above the rest. In this manner, attend as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds use the following method: have it bandaged with a pitiable cloth in your hands, then assemble the edges; this is the common way for sutures and that you take a needle or several depending on the width of the wound, leaving from the head of the wound I finger's length, and insert an eyelet or more with a good strong thread; puncture both sides of the skin with two eyes at the base, and as long as you do so, gather those two edges together until they are aligned in pairs. Then stretch a double thread around the needle from both ends, then bring the edges of the wound together again, leaving I finger's length apart, and insert another eyelet; tie the thread like your first stitch, without stopping as long as you need to secure all the stitches; use medium-sized eyes that are neither too small nor too large, because very small ones won't cut through well and very large ones can't enter properly. The second method of suturing with eyelets is more suitable for small wounds because it uses only one needle or two if needed, assemble the edges of the skin and fat together at a time using a strong thread; then put a bandage on the eyes to prevent them from sticking when rested, and leave as long as the wound is stitched.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestines as it had been XXIV hours since, and the wound was dressed until day fifteen, and I treated him, and he became well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the master believed he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; instead, twice daily, I placed old cotton over the wound and washed it with honey water until he became well.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Or I will tell you two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and thread it through to the point where the skin is thickest; when it pierces straight ahead on the correct side or wherever you inserted the neede, pass it back out from another part inside until reaching that same place; and the understanding of this stitch is to sew as a tailor would with leather pieces, leaving one edge once pierced and then the other, continuing so until the entire suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of suture, as Galien properly states, is similar to any other, which joins the two parts together naturally and applies one end of the silk thread to the other end in such a manner: pierce with a needle or fine silk near where it's needed, puncture only slightly at that location leaving both ends of the sinew; then turn the needle, and pierce from that part forward until reaching inside as close to those two ends of the sinew; then pierce each end of that part forward in two other pieces of fine silk that are on the opposite side; this is the manner of suture and it's most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galien says this word and others attest to it: one must sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread; and push one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and know that when the suture is amidst the abdomen, then this method of suturing is more difficult than others on the rest of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgments of the wound are such as with other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound fully moved, thus straighten its intestines and stitches; then apply powdered charcoal, and if the artery has moved, put on any ointment present until the wound heals; and cut a slit, and be sure it is sealed, and lined with mirabilis herb, then treat the wound as others, until it becomes healthy again; and if you have no medicines, apply cotton swabs immediately when it starts to fester, move them twice daily until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 For in certain conditions the wounds are simple and require no other medicine besides; and if you doubt that the wound is causing community among the principal members, then lightly moisten with warm oil or rose oil, placing it around the joints and under the ankles; and if there is pain or swelling in the groin, which often occurs, perform a wine-blackened vinegar enema, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines; and probe internally, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is distressed, and this is because of the proliferation of veins within it, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness to the nervous system.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 If the sinew springs from the wound, reset it as with the intestines while fresh; and if it becomes old or blackened, then you must remove the dark area to prevent blood flow due to veins and arteries; then address what is between the ligaments, and place two pendulous heads below the part above the wound until they ease the extraction as sinews heal, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of boils
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestines are inflamed and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases because I saw a man was afflicted with an abdomen from a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became swollen, and turned into a fistula, resulting in evacuation and winds; I treated according to what I could do, and did not cease subtlety until it was healed, and the seeds were sown.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it welded together, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; but there was no harm at all, just better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experienced observers said that if there is a small wound inside the intestine, it should be tied off thus: take large testes, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the fumes pass through the mouth, they stretch their mouth over two lips, so it pulls out; and then cover the head, and keep it that way until it cannot come apart, then put another fume after in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is closed; and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 The head swells in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient; one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine: take the end of this thread of intestine that is quite dry, then bind it with a fine linen thread twisted tightly, put the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, ensuring proper stitching; this method of frantic stitching does not vary unless by trust and hope. And if the wound is large and wide, especially when located in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	From a fistula or where it may be found
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 When any wound or abscess ages, it is universally called 'fistula', especially when it swells and becomes protruding.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is caused by the incorrect location of blood vessels and skin, where there is no pain felt, and it swells like a bird's feather; at times clearly protruding, and at other times thickened; sometimes hard, and at other times soft; among all wounds not properly treated, and if they are untreated, this occurs for one of the nine reasons: namely, due to lack of blood or tissue; or because it is malignant; or there is a hardening inside that does not allow healing on its surface; or excessive swelling; or the wound area is inflamed, and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine used for treatment is not good; or due to decay being a form of pestilence; or because of the late digestion in that region, resulting in slow healing naturally; or if there are foreign bodies or bone. I have already demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in the section on wounds.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to teach you about the treatment of an abscess, which is done by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Leaking occurs in all parts of the body; for there are leaks that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or intestines, or bladder, or to certain ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of hands or feet; and if it comes near the principal part of a limb, and other areas.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 Leaks of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any leak that does not come close to where I have mentioned, and you trust in its cure, and see it confirmed, then take a tent from wax or iron if the fistula is straight, use it; and if the fletee is twisted, search with a finer tent made of lead, for lead can bend around the tortuosity; and if the fistule has many openings and you cannot well trace them by tents, clysterize through one of the orifices, as moisture will flow from one opening to another, and cleanse it. Then gently cope with your power, asking the patient about pain felt at the pressure of your hand and where it is felt; and when you know truly where it is, and whether it's away from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the areas I have mentioned, follow my instructions to cure accordingly, removing foul matter and hardened pus within. Then continue the treatment until healed, and if the fistulee is deeply straight, cope with it completely as much as you can see; then apply moist bandages soaked in medicinal water, filling them up to the top of the fistule, until the medicine corrodes the excess material at its bottom. Then apply balms mixed with curative herbs until they are healed; and if it is not healed by this, cauterize as I have said before, and if bone has been affected by the fistulee, remove it (cope).
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If veins or nerves affect limbs or main members as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, so treat until all decay has eaten through to the bone, then heal in various ways until it becomes healthy again; and if not healthy, reconstruct similarly as before, being aware you do not need to go all the way to heaven: uncover and work until reaching the bottom, remove all decay, then restore its place; and if thusly made healthy, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, understand that the decay is too extensive to reach, there is no other remedy but from nature's course; and if there are small corrupted bones present, you may extract them with pliers, using a suitable instrument for this purpose, and if many bones exist, remove all of them without exception; and if moisture acts adversely, causing neither error nor fear, protect the site and keep it dry, and liberate the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something unpleasant and putrefying on the wound, allowing it to be surrounded by bone; then they will more easily have their bones removed; and if it is a large bone, like of leg or thigh, repeatedly cleanse the decay until all the bone is gone, then close the wound; and if there is a significant portion affected by corruption, reaching near to molten bone; it must be entirely covered up to the point of corruption, and then cured until solidified; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, from which you can take example and assistance for your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Once upon a time there was a youth not more than thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came into the body, so much that substances reached the leg and were expelled through a large abscess, with no other reason for it to be opened; however, by their folly doctors worked enough on it until they cut open the abscesses, and consumed a great deal of materials, and it became an fistula. A lot of pus was coming out from all over his body; many doctors treated him for two years, without any healing in the art of hands, until I was called upon, and when I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what was flowing through the fistulas to a large part of his body. His body would turn red as a youth, and had an orange-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I built a tent over one of these points, and then searched all the points, finding that each came into contact with the other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Thus I proceeded, and made an incision until I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted and felt, reaching corruption up to the inner side of the bone; it appeared as if only that piece of corrupted bone existed apart from others. I began treating the wound with medicinal poultices for a long time but could not heal it; so I started again and found the same in the bone, continuous corruption persisted within the bone which I exposed, and then reattached, and attempted to stitch at that location. But despite cutting around nearly an inch of bone, the entirety tore easily apart once more. I treated it with medicines again; soon after, it became healthy and quickly sealed up without further complications due to only the weakness of the patient who could not endure much pain and fearing death for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood is often soiled, but he was entirely sound, and in the place of the bone arose a hard clot, which was well-formed and had no harm or opposition at all, neither on approach nor on departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, do it thus: take a line (ligature), and stretch it at the head of the bone that has been torn apart, and command no one to move it upward; then take another piece of linen larger than the first ligament, tie it over the clot on the bone, and pull on the head so that you remove the corrupted clot from below, revealing the clot at the place where treatment is needed, ensuring the suture does not loosen. Place a wick or piece of wood under the bone to warm up the corrupted clot; treat it until one can see and feel the decay, repeating as necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a part or on one side, reveal the entire thing; then remove the tissue above it, and move from one part of the corruption to the other, taking care that your touch is no longer than as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, excise the affected joint, and reach the bone or what contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there's nothing but a coping to be done; and if the corruption is on the tip of hand or foot, that thing is very strong indeed, but nevertheless you must seek out that corrosion, as it opens for you; cleanse it by all means possible without causing pain from nerves or tendons; know that incisors and scrapers for covering these bones are many, depending on the position of the bones and their appearance, size, density, subtlety, largeness, smallness, hardness; therefore you must provide each work with its appropriate instrument; know that your craft will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the indications from the handling of diseases; so consider the instrument needed according to what is necessary.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may rot or become hollow due to decay within, or from external causes; and when you have administered the medicinal treatment for this corrosion through the use of remedies, but they prove ineffective, then cover that limb up to where the corrosion originates, so that the patient may escape by its means (or die), or due to a greater harm from the faulty member; and the signs are such that the limb turns black as if it had been scorched with fire, after which the corrosion spreads from one limb to another, affecting the entire body. If you act quickly in covering it up, especially if this is caused by a sting or bite from venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea, snakes, and similar beings, then when the corrosion reaches the head near the collarbone, cover that area so that there is no delay until it reaches the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it comes up to the hand, cap its joint, prevent corrosion from reaching the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cap the elbow; and if it passes the elastoid, that's death, with no remedies except for the quantity of its virtue; and thus do what you must when corrosion comes or spreads: if it reaches the first joint, then cap after the next joint; and if it affects the arm, then cap all of it; and if it moves up to the leg, then cap at the knee joint; and if it's above the knee, there is no other remedy but for the malaise patient to die; the manner of capping or soaking the limb must be such that you bind it above and below, extending slender bands from each fastening, then unfasten the strap between the two straps a span wide, until the bone is exposed; then cap or soak, placing one piece of linen on either side, ensuring the suture does not touch healthy tissue, which could cause further injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 If bleeding occurs while working, promptly cauterize the area or apply restraining powders; then return to your medicine until completed, then bind the wounded limb with an obligatory ligature and treat it until healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man: a blackness appeared that seemed like fire scorching on his thumb joints, consuming the entire fingers. When the man saw the corrosion, he cauterized the hand and was healed; many years later, the corrosion reappeared in his hand from his arm, coming to me, and I treated him with impactful remedies after body purification, but could not stop the corrosions. Doubt arose whether I should cut his hand, as my hope of rebinding the matter remained; so he despaired and returned home, cauterizing his own hand and was healed again. I have no other stories like this to share unless one wishes for alternatives on what can be done if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 At no time does an abscess occur in its original place, and it remains so long that it forms a large mass of pus; then they burst and perforate, causing the pus to flow, and the eyelids remain closed like shutters; and the skin above is as fine as cut silk, not reaching even to the bone or nerve, thus such illnesses are called "healthy" and not "fistula"; but if it becomes so extended that it reaches the bone entirely, then it is a fistula. And the skin must be removed completely around it; especially when it is as fine as cut silk.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if you have faith that the skin is inflamed, and there is no rot at its core, and the skin has a scent of fresh blood, then apply an enema in this manner: check if the cheeks are large, and the bow which is there smells bad, then prepare the Egyptian medicine thusly: take ease, oil, and litargur equally, and cook it in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; afterwards add according to your need, mix with water and hebrews, strain into the cheeks, and compress the nostrils. Leave the medicine for two hours then remove by pressing out; repeat this many times until the cheek becomes normal and the pores are clear; do not use an enema of water from ashes unless this Egyptian medicine is present, but if it's not you can take ash from grapevine wood, boil in water and apply with a cloth. After that, if the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the enema with honey and mild wine, then use an enema of just water and honey with a bit of litargur mixed; otherwise mix with sweet vinegar as honey cleanses and wine strengthens health. Once you have done this, if you are certain that the cheeks have been restored properly, apply an ointment to promote hair growth in that area using aloes wood or malleable iron oil in mead; alternatively use different medications and unguents as I mentioned their properties earlier for ointments. If the nostrils within the enema are too small and cannot receive the liquid, slightly widen them with a piece of iron then apply an Egyptian or basilisk ointment until they have expanded; if the wound is very wide, let it be cauterized as much as needed for the clay to enter.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is in fullness, do not leave it uncovered with hair; and if you cannot cover the chest without what you see, prepare it so that the bow falls to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is in fullness, do not leave it uncovered with hair and if you cannot cover the chest as you see, then arrange: that the bow falls gently downwards, and leaves nothing of the bow; and take medicines strengthening for placing on the saint, and extend over a linen cloth that covers all the saint; then cover the forces spot on the edge of the chest slightly wider than the first, since apply ointment under another cloth according to the quantity of the spot, and put it under the spot on the saint to lighten the bow, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the edge of the chest will often be removed to remove the bow, and know where it runs from the bow, whether it's venom or a bit or quite much, or digested, or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such manner and you see the nature underneath the edge of the chest, know that the chest will swell again, and approach healing; then remove it in the morning, or after a day, and when you open the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 If subtle corruption comes after long time, do not despair of health, for healing is nearing.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For there are those who delay healing in their wounds and do the opposite; and if an indigestible bile rises to the breast after many days, know that the breasts may not swell much; and if they rise late or have been displaced for a long time, apply purgative medicines moistened with substances and dry in virtue, like diaphoretics; for there is often a large amount of lead, which is one of the final remedangs; take diaphoretic ointment and mix it with rose oil and wine balanced in content; then warm it and use it. Apply melted honey-like medicine similarly, if diaphoretic ointments are not available, or you take myrrh, aloe, and incense, and grind them into a powder mixed with honey while on the fire; then spread it over a linen cloth, apply to the breast, and do not administer aristolochia frequently, nor roots of celestial lilies which are similar to wheat flour or bran. Use simple or compound remedies: grind them, turn into powder, mix with honey as mentioned earlier, and use it; if the healing is protracted and not achieved by this treatment, know that corruption is spreading throughout, pressing on bones, hard limbs, or sinews. Continue with fistula cure, as we have previously described.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	For the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the hand or foot, or occasionally in other joints; and when it matures, and one does not take care, then many abscesses develop, and burns and pus flow until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they devour all; and there come inflammations up to the bone, causing great pain, and the joint is swoln broadly, and the color turns dusky.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section on treatment, and the remedy does not help, then you must cut all the excess tissue associated with the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caulteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is clean; and if the nail presses on a vein, and it begins to throb and bruise, then you should place your needle underneath the nail where the blood starts, push upward, and carefully drain the subtle blood before applying remedies that are heating and corrosive to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 If corrosion is in the bone and you drain it, and treat forcefully because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal; and if you see a joint being corrupted, then drain it as previously mentioned, treating until it is healthy. And if it is severe and swollen, causing great pain, first relieve it; then remove the nail with a spatula-like tool cutting across beneath it, but be careful that you do not reach to the vein underneaturessince the patient would feel too much pain; and if so, apply something above that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand must be soothed
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocation that exists in the shoulders of some people by chance is entirely fleshly, and sometimes there are bones present, and at times a single one; none of them arise from the root of the joint where their origin lies within the shoulders.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Those that arise in any part of the shoulder do not move, and those that originate at the joint of the shoulder sometimes move; the build of someone fleshly is light, shaping them with a wide span from their root.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the joint's root is difficult to treat; use your thumb for this.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In those whose shoulder arises or continues in us, it is necessary to first remove the roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then heal until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come with bone fractures occur through birth, or from the severity of a wound, or scorching heat, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to treat the swelling, so that they are repaired according to their natural forms; then place between two tents or linen cloths smeared with oil of roses, ensuring they do not stick together; or place between two pieces of fine plank until the joints are fused as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the joining comes to either of its ends with the palm, cover that joinery accordingly as it should be.
des vils	 Of evil spirits
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large wounds swollen with excessive and melancholic humors that come to various body parts; and more often occurs in the legs of those who walk barefoot and work and carry loads, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore that you should administer an enema once and then purify with salt of the balsamic ointment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is to cut them and drain the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The body is treated in this manner: raise the first leg with hot water very strong so that the bone becomes subtleized, then support the leg by the patient's thigh up to the area below the hip; then tie off the vein at one place, either once, twice or three times, with a wide cuff; and extract and pull out the black blood as much as possible from hand to hand until what remains can tolerate its virtue; and then apply bandages, and command that it be dressed in dark meats; and again begin evacuation and healing when the veins are clear, without harming the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The treatments for this condition are as follows: lift the affected leg if it has much hair, then place it in a bath; raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins; if you have no bath, heat it over fire and then tie off the vein at the length from head to hip or below the ankle; work on the skin near the bone, and scrape the vein from each side until you can feel it; when it appears red and black, resembling a white cord; push paste underneath until it rises up with the skin, then tie lightly to another place three finger widths above; scrape the skin off the vein as much as possible, then elevate at the joint, just as you have done before, and bind it again to another joint if necessary. Then apply another bandage or more if needed, and wrap around the foot's joint, pulling until reaching the second layer of skin; gradually remove each layer, repeating this process until all is removed, then apply a compress; if unable to extract and lift, use a sharp needle through a strong double thread, insert it into the vein, and turn your hand back and forth until emptied. Be sure not to cut as that would prevent extraction or lifting, causing harm to the patient; after treating completely, place clean linen soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; continue care until healthy again.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the bone is twisted and wrapped together as a whole, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but not cover it completely; and treat it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron with which you cap the bone is curved, and does not cut, so it covers the vein; and has a large curvature, for if it were fine, it would injure the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, this is the form:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is situated in legs, warm parts where there are no herbs or trees and the ground does not retain moisture; and sometimes it can be found elsewhere than on the legs, occurring from putrefaction that comes from under the skin like what happens inside the body with serpents and worms hiding between skin and muscle.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning occur, a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the lice change, and the vein starts to protrude outward like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head opens up, it must be wrapped with a piece of linen from 2 to 3 inches above and below the wound, leaving the bandage on the leg as much as necessary; every time it becomes loose or comes off, wrap around the liner and wound; if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remainder without covering its root until it's fully exposed; for if you cover it, it will reopen in the flesh, leading to abscesses, putrefaction, or other diseases. Therefore, it must be treated slowly and gradually until nothing remains inside or outside; on no occasion is this vein left when treated with 5-10 hands wide, or for a man who experienced an opening of 10 hands long, and when you cover it, it causes one to vomit blood or pus, perforating all the way down until emptying itself inside. Then remove the matter within using medicinal poultices every day, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Et never to the vein hands rain, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or toe, and there is much swelling, and which it bursts out; treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 From the veins that arise between flesh and hair.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it often occurs in the bile and is a small worm that arises between skin and hair, moving up and down throughout the body, causing discomfort from one limb to another until it pierces the skin where it goes, bursting out strongly; and it suffers from putrefaction of certain humors as they come in serpents, luminarias, and ascarids or intestines. Doubt arises regarding its nature because when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head, reaches the eye, and on occasion returns, destroying the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being drawn and emptied, one cannot move unless when emptying occurs: therefore, securely bind the location above and below a strong joint well, then cut near it, and if blood flows out in abundance into the wound, cauterize with fire until it stops; the greatest harm it causes is that oil may come forth as we have said; and if you see it approaching or close to the opening, firmly press down on the eyebrow, then cut near, and draw off the blood; one should use cleaning of the body with medicinal solutions for removing bad humors, and treat with putrefied meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 from the pain arising from windwounding
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This illness is called "vacik" in our land, and it causes pain that moves from one limb to another; and this is what I have seen with my own eyes.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to see a sickly woman, and I discovered swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm; then shortly after, I noticed it ascending like a worm up to the shoulder, faster than any other thing, similar to silver when cut from one place to another; the pain left that location, and moved to the shoulder, and then spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm; she told me that she felt it returning inward around her body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Nevertheless, I wanted to maintain that the pain would move from one place to another, but I did not observe this as in the woman; and I thought it was because she had dry skin, and veins exposed, and hence appeared constrained bloating; and neither do those who are delicious nor those with moist skin and reopened veins exhibit such a reason.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain if they reveal it as we have said, apply a poultice above and below quickly, and then bandage until the constrained bloating subsides at its place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat as for those who alleviate flatulence, such as foul pills, serpentine pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	 of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrowheads are of various kinds, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they embed themselves.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 There are various kinds among them, some with large points and small ones, feathered or joined; others have two angles, others with tongues, and those that break into pieces in any part of the body—whether it is a primary member like the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, etc., they all fracture in one of two ways: either within the main members such as mentioned, or elsewhere.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it breaks in any of these parts of the body, and signs of death appear as I will describe hereafter: one must be wary during the extraction of this arrowhead because death approaches in various ways afterward; but if this sign does not become apparent and the arrowhead is not deeply embedded, then treat and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when the arrow enters and pierces the bone is that it jumps and shakes, causing headache, dizziness, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and distortion of understanding, vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is no strength from the nose or ears; and perhaps speech and voice are affected; and a wound with moist white appearing like hairs, similar to being burned by charcoal; and if this sign becomes apparent, pursue the treatment, remove the arrow unless it's already exited.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it pierces or hits a body part is that it feels near the left breast and seems as if inserted into something hard, not hollow; and sometimes the arrow moves like hairs, and comes out black blood, with coldness coming in, and pale sweat, and fainting: be aware then of doubt leading to death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of arrow wound is that its normal appearance does not have plain foam coming from the wound; instead, the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, they gasp loudly, and ask for cold water.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen near the ribs, then it is close to small intestines; and produces a lot of pus and great pain and gasping; and all limbs shake uncontrollably.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	they le T1 is:t's (b J. Do so: M. The 5-e a, the pique by;llt'm and m, but n’d.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	When the arrow falls into the belly and does not exit through the intestines, there is no hope for its recovery or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine does not pass through it, causing strong pain to the patient; know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as it is made and the neck and throat and shoulder and joints and spine of the back and ribs and thighs, and the limbs appearing to be safe, according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to certain individuals that an arrow lodged in the root of their nose; I attempted it, and extracted from beneath the ear fat, leaving them unharmed without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And extracted from a body an arrow that was lodged in the fat underneath the paper below it, and the arrowhead was thrust back, only reaching the tip towards its base, being large like those shot from a Turkish bow without any ear protection; the wound healed well, with no adverse occurrences.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was a Middle Eastern-style arrowhead with ear protection: I removed the barbs, and carefully continued to extract until the Christian was unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And pierced by an arrow at the liver, which was close to the belly, and I thought it would die; but after thirty days had passed, its condition did not change; I cut near the arrow, manipulated it, extracted it successfully, and there were no adverse consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if an arrow falls onto the back causing a sutured wound; and remains lodged inside, without altering its natural disposition or finding harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And there was another man to whom an arrow fell on his face, resulting in a sutured wound; it remained causing him great pain, and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And pierced an arrow in the man of high rank, the king, lodged near his chest and slightly inclined to the right; the arrow was fully embedded after three days when I was called for treatment.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 He tried with all subtlety, but did not feel it; and he felt neither pressure nor pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead and placed on the location astringent and digestive to prevent swelling since his eyes were not inflamed, and then the eye sockets became visible due to the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I placed the astringent overnight and dried out the wound thoroughly, so that the patient rested for long periods until he felt the arrow inside his nose; then he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive ointment overnight until it softened and tried to pull the arrowhead out; then I exposed the wound with that same medicine until the head of the arrow became visible; after passing through all its extremities in about four months, I tended to the sores on both sides, but they could not come out. Then I stopped trying directly and devised various methods of extraction until one day I managed to extract it successfully with pliers made according to this book's instructions by following its final recommendations, leaving the wound closed.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the masters judge that the fracture of the nose cannot be restored: I will reset it then, and the wound is securely closed, and the patient becomes entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 Or have I told you the quality of arrow extraction, so that you apply your treatment where I do not mention; for the book cannot cover everything; but wise masters know a great deal, and on what is present and failing, they work with nine works and nine instruments, dealing with strange occurrences in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows are found in limbs where they are deeply embedded either by the front or from another side; and those that burst forth through their entry point, are transverse lodged in fleshly tissues, and cannot break at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not come out now, let it rest until the joint is loosened and discharged; and similarly if it is wedged in the bone and cannot be removed, let it remain for several days, moving slightly each day; then it will come out, and if it still does not come out, carefully make a small hole around all sides until the cavity opens up, and then extract.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is embedded in the skull and reaches up to one of the brain's hemisangs, some of the accidents I have mentioned earlier occur: do not pull it out but let it rest until they are equal after several days, because if the arrowhead reaches close to a sinus, it causes death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the sinew, and the patient suffers for some days without any ill effects, then you must try to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is excessively stuck and cannot be removed easily, then administer plasters around it as I have told you; then heal the wound until it is sound again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is reinserted into its proper place but cannot be seen, seek it throughout the body; and if you feel it, try to extract with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot reach through the widening of the wound or deepen to grasp the arrowhead, and there are no bones, nerves, or tendons present, then pry until the wound is large enough; and extract the arrowhead if you can feel it, and if the arrow has ears (holes) from which it hangs, remove the wood that holds it in place with a twist of what you can grasp, then break or bend the ears of the arrow so as to extract it more easily; but do so carefully not to shatter the arrowhead, allowing for smoother extraction.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot reset it once, let it reach the joint before moving forward and then extract it, as the extraction would be painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 If the flow of blood progresses contrary to what we have said in its chapter, follow the treatment as we have described; and beware of cutting the nerve or vein, and devise a method to extract the arrowhead without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the form they were in when the arrowhead fell upon them, for that is the greatest aid it can be, and if you cannot do so, follow what the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 For an arrowhead that comes from another side, or pierces anything of it, or if the skin is swollen at any noticeable spot: then cut there as long as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it; if sharp now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	them irt by exam t Orel Zequere ben: C; if theisse.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, leave it for the time being and then resume extraction as long as possible; if it is of an arrowhead, push it into all parts of its body; if it has broken off, administer soothing treatment, using an instrument with a pointed end whereby the tip of the arrowhead enters the handle of the tool; then continue pushing, and if the arrowhead is fully inserted, position the instrument to aid in extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is touched, it's necessary to remove all surrounding flesh where the poison resides if possible, then treat the wound accordingly.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead breaks or pierces the abdameno or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, remove as much of it as you can if possible, then extract it; be careful not to cut the vein and nerve, and then extract, and dress the wound accordingly; care for it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	est bonte que il fit de cat, thent un m; and: ca:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow shaft.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the arrowhead is also like that of a bird's beak, to point at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	to use pliers for inserting and selecting, as shown here.
des voinnes dou cors communes	common bodily illnesses
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins of which we are aware are XXXI in number, including the chief XVI as follows: II Batans located behind the ears, called "herbech"; and II arteries visible in II temples; II veins situated in II temple corners ("aspires"); a vein right at mid-forehead; a vein at the crown of the head where the hairline is; II jugular veins that are present on the neck collarbone area; the II veins that run above the lips, known as "augeherich"; and two veins located beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins which are commonly bled in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is located near the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the other is called "fast", composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it "vein of the body"; the basilic is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly," and it lies under the bend, and that's the one from which blood is commonly drawn, clearly visible above the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the salvatic vein is between the little finger and the ring finger, with two branches; in the leg where the foot is, there are three veins: one under the hollow of the left armpit called "cubitus", another at the ankle on the right side called "sophene"; the one called "nether" which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The illness of the veins that are after the ears also aids in ancient sweating and migraines; and the condition of the vessel, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then tighten their collar with a cord until the two veins appear behind the ears in two lobes depending on the skull: hold them at your finger joints, and wherever you feel hair above your wrist, clamp it off; then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein towards yourself, and scrape and cut the skin and vein clean with two strokes, allowing blood to flow until you see enough; then tie and ligate it until it is healed; and I have already told of the incision and cautery as in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The veins of the two arteries located in both temples, if infected by an old and well-established eyestrain, accompanied by watery eyes; the nature of this condition is such as I describe: causing the patient to turn their neck until the veins are clearly visible. They feel pain at the back of the head, then become stiff; then lift the face toward the index finger above the vein, and insert the lancet below it; draw out the vein upward towards the brow in line with the index finger, and perform as you have done for the other two veins, bleed according to your necessity. Then lay down the patient and bandage the area after an hour, then cover with cotton; leave until healed completely. We have discussed here both dressing and extraction methods mentioned at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The vein of the forehead is as valuable as that for headaches from old facial diseases, and migraines, and redness; and its nature is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fosser," which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the tip over the vein, and pierce it with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow out according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is completely closed without leaving a wide scar.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it must not be that the flame is too sharp; and if straight downwards, because the bone is near, and occasionally breaking the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The vein of the two eyes that are in the eyelids helps with eye issues, and twitching, redness, inflammation in the oil, and facial diseases; its nature is such that the patient twists his neck without any ligament as before; then suture it carefully, making a long incision slightly wider, for there is no scarring.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the spinal cord is delicate, perhaps it breaks; then make the incision in the blood vessel, as much as you need, and then tie off at the edge of the cut, securely fastening it.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The blood of the vein due to fever, and deafness, and facial illnesses such as migraine and reddening that occurs on the face, especially when it is ancient; and the quality of this blood is that it causes patients to tighten their neck, then extend their nose to your left hand, and take a long subtle flame, inserting it between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well by itself, so the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too far in, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it off for a night, as it is quickly restored; this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The straining of the scrotum aids in stretching of the penis, and at the beginning of surgery, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and eyelid spasms; and the quality of the strain is such that the patient withdraws his neck from both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient grip the table tightly, then squeeze the veins wide for a while, then bleed the blood quickly, or however much is necessary; then redo in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and tug on both veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle himself; and leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 From the inflammation of the joints
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sickness of veins on top leads to dryness in the mouth, and gum decay, and splits in the lips, and bad breath and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of the inflammation is to seat the patient in front of you and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, recognizing them by being black and having small dark veins around them. So tie off both, and if you do not recognize them, and thus doubtful, clip the larger of each, and similarly for the two sets above and below, as they are in the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 From inflammation underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The inflammation of the veins under the tongue aids after cephalic inflammation and is at the narrowing of the throat, along with eye diseases and mouth disepsies; the quality of the healing is that the patient cuts between their hands in front of the sunlight, lifts the tongue, and looks beneath each side for one black vein: thus tie off both, but not too tightly, as these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins to be opened, which are commonly healed by two methods: either with an instrument grasping the entire width of skin, or using a slender and sharp olive-oil stone, called "anisol"; and they are wide and narrow according to the expansion and contraction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	f;
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open straight-haired veins with visible large blood and containing a lot of thick and turbid blood; this is the form of the slender olive-oil stone.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and used to drain subtle veins where there is delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, aids in illnesses that are below the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen; it is necessary for the healer to cleanse thoroughly, and to wash with the artery located beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 If it cuts the artery and blood flow occurs, then one must stem it as I have said; and the flame should not be painful but shall burn gently as if soothed.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you should extract it and change to another; or if you wish for none of its rays, or sense in place of it within the vein near the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the flame gently as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you see to know the place of the hernia, then it is necessary that you extract the arm and touch the place until you know its hairs; then mark the place with a sign, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein gently with the flame; and beware not to wound the artery when you see the place swell up, for it is of the artery: thus avoid.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you see it protruding upward like a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, recognize that it is from an artery: then quickly raise your elbow, then straighten your arm if possible; this often occurs; so let the arm rest, do not move it, keep the patient still until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and there are no medicines available, tie off the artery if it opens, as holding back the blood at its source; then close the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Take a strip of linden bark, and break it, then take one half and apply until the next day; if veins recede, that's good; if not, cure using powders that coagulate blood; and the emaincing is not always caused by various positions for small wound locations or the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein at the wound site should be cut to allow blood flow on top and below as it is composed of basilar and cephalic elements, as we have said; and the surgeon must cleanse himself because of the nerve underneath, and if he does not do so thoroughly, and injures the nerve, causing swelling and pain in the surrounding area, sometimes unable to cure it; this nerve has been opened many times, and if it doesn't open for some people due to its subtlety, then you must cleanse with an instrument.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	When there is a vein between the two nerves, it causes great pain.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and aids in healing; one must cleanse by gently touching at the occipital or frontal eminence as it is the most effective of all wounds, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the least painful position, and do not weigh anything if you must reset for the first time, and then start over; and sometimes swelling occurs in some men when they must reset for the first time, but do not cause them harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing is as you think it should be.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about healing is that it is not performed solenly for the purpose of maintaining health and avoiding future illnesses; and it should be approached in one of the three manners which are headache, fasting, or basilica; and it should commence with prayers before dinner, and also after meals in autumn and winter when signs of fullness appear; and healing should begin on the first day or third, two to three hours or days later.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healing appointed for diseases does not have a determined time, but when needed is during the day or night, at all hours and always; it is not necessary to treat children up until fourteen years old, nor women carrying a child beyond the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	the patient. The l’s the first, then they;
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When one wishes to heal in any manner, it is necessary that they empty the intestines with a light enema if there are too many feces retained, so that veins do not draw excess substances harmful to the principal members; do not treat those who are overly weakened by foods, or drunkards, until they have sufficiently recovered, nor diarrheic individuals. After treating those affected by colic, vomiting, abdominal disorders, and frequent occurrences of defecation in women, labor pains, feverish conditions, night waking, menses, and the like; then carefully balance the humors with foods, drinks, and medicines as you see fit. Then take a bath unless anything prevents it to facilitate blood circulation, and cleanse the vein around the navel area after three hours as we have instructed; also avoid labor, exertion, lustful activities, and similar things on that day. Be vigilant and joyous, make sure your healer is more skilled than those you are treating, and rub their arms two or three times before gently removing any ligatures above the middle point because if it's too loose or tight, it cannot be properly loosened; then rub the abdomen with oil until the veins swell, and smell for signs of infection. Finally, apply a small amount of old olive oil to their hand and place it against the vein below the navel as you wish to heal, ensuring that the vein does not break upon contact.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that escape like strings in a basket, and some of which are filled with windiness so that when they are placed over the flame, it retracts back from the flame and cannot open the vein, thus becoming those; and if it does pass through the vein, then the wound is too narrow because of this, so one must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; if not, begin again a little lower than where you initially started, unless the bone is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the wound is swollen and the patient hopes for improvement, let it rest a day or two without binding the arm: there may come abscesses; do not apply a bath but if desired, reopen the vein again; and if the hole is small or subtly corrupted, doubt whether it does not bleed as much as you see, then straighten that flair entirely with fire; quickly treat the wound so that the wound swells, for this often happens when the injury is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not continue to bandage it, and apply a little oil, for it eases the body's painful blood flow, and works wonders in this place by the oil; thus treat each vein with oil as if they are veins, to stop the blood flow; similarly done with triplet and bowl when placed on the joint; delicately and separates easily when too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if it comes to large abscesses often, especially when the vein opening is small at that time and you hurry, place a moist sponge in warm water and salt, and hold for an hour; then do as follows after the blood flow from the vein ceases, and if there remains any discoloration or greenish tinge on the joint afterwards for several days, do not worry about it; and if you see anything of aloes or myrrh dissolved in calamus juice, musk, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance of the sinew in the lower part: therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the area tender to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be sure not to place anything as we have mentioned on it, for perhaps there may be an artery involved; but give a dry poultice to harden the wound, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each type of blood according to its quantity and color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see a large wound, leave it open until it becomes thinner; and if it's too hot, allow it to cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 It is necessary for those who are plain and exposed, and in need of bloodletting, to make a wider wound; and for the weak ones, do the opposite, strengthen them little by little and often, support them while cutting across rather than poking; this method of support prevents excessive bleeding and nerve compression, it is better valued when narrow rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For those whose body needs support, give them milk bread in pomegranate juice; if they are exhausted, feed it to them three or four times a day. If they have a cold complexion, serve the nourishment of kneaded bread in syrup before supporting, or in honeyed syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, along with a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If the patient feels faint after a great loss of blood, then it is proper that he inhale a mixture of charcoal and rose odorant syrup, and use other remedcks as we have mentioned in the section on syncope for vein evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to drain the arms, and bandage at other times as needed when greatly swollen, so that it is drained little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	. This bone;
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	When one wishes to heal another part, it must be done on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Because there is much blood within the body that has become overheated and brings fever; thus, it may be necessary to bleed greatly, and dilate the pores until they sweat copiously; then you must address all conditions of faintness, and place your hand under the hair when he breathes deeply to prevent death at the spot where he is drenched, as this often happens if caregivers are negligent. You should not separate the arm or extract blood a second time when the vessel is sealed; instead, firmly press near it. If it bulges, extend the arm hastily would be harmful; leave until it sweats and purges again. Do this with a small amount of boiled water on cloths applied to the pores where sweat has stopped flowing due to congealed blood vessels, then gently press for relief.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, leave it unbound until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed again for blood the second time, drain from there just as before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins within the arm are drained at the location of the head vein because it is composed thusly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The manner of sanation is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the fingers are red; then tie it off securely so the vein appears well, then suture across without being too wide or long; ensure the stitches are close to the joint of the hand and not leaking, if this occurs, dip the hand again in hot water and allow blood into the water until you have enough; and do not repeat with cold water as it is more effective in winter than summer; and suturing for this vein is safer than all other treatments, without tendons or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The sanation of the palm of the right hand is suitable for all liver diseases, and it works as follows: straighten the hand and place in hot water until the vein flows out, which you can see; if suturing horizontally across the entire area, do not injure anything; and do not make too thick with stitches, because nerves are close to skin surface, so after removing from hot water, if blood is coagulated in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and a bandage to join it quickly, and do so for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The remedy of the sinew in the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything as I have told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The inflammation of the testicles is suitable for all diseases that are outside the body, such as conditions of the bones, and retention of semen, and disease of the reins, and old ailments of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 The qualities of its inflammation are such that the patient should pour boiling water on it and rub the vein until it softens, then wrap above the joints around the foot; if the bandage is at the ankle, place many rags over it to be moved; thus, swaddle it or wider rags at the ankle.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you are feeling under the foot, beware of the nerves that lie beneath, and tend to the vein as when grafting; let the swelling remain narrowed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and ensure the vein empties well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the inflammations need to be repeated a second time above a little, because the eyes are salted; do not doubt of the nerves as we have said, and so treat the testicles equally on the other side.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The origin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its lining corresponds to the pain in the thigh when it's full of blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The condition of his health is such that the patient must be bathed and stretched above the ankle four fingers' width by twisting, as otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, you must cleanse it thoroughly in all ways possible, including across; and make sure to bandage it because the wound is sore, and it is much swollen with blood.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you do not cleanse it thoroughly, rinse all the areas that are opened or cut, and towards the small toe, and protect from nerves; and make sure to properly irrigate with blood seen, and then tie up the wound, and place cotton and strain it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 The sentences of blood from bladder pressure relief
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blood-letting is done with horns, or glass, or crystal; and phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 The ventilation methods of this procedure are as follows: one is done throughout the body with fire; and another with bloodletting. This method involving cutting and extracting blood occurs at 14 different locations on the body: one above the head, one in the neck, two along each side of the neck, under the chin, over both shoulders, over shins (calves), over both arms, over both legs, and over both ankles. The ventilation from these areas does not produce blood but rather small veins scattered throughout the body; therefore, it cannot be performed in every individual as with a vein puncture, so this method should only be administered when no other treatments are effective for diseases caused by excess accumulation until all parts of the body have been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if by necessity of illness it comes to purging, or due to habits, let us purge each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day; for there are those who, when they need purging, have a heavy headache; and those who experience fullness and redness in their face, forehead, and neck, with blindness in their eyes; and such that encounter a drop of blood in their mouth, and swollen tongue, and bleeding; and there are some who think and see through pus-filled sores and wounds and deathlike things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we instruct to attempt resetting after three hours past midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The ventosation of the brain also assists greatly with ... what occurs in them, and it must only happen after the evacuation of all their body; and this purging is related to the condition of the head, and should not be used by those who are cold complexioned or have choleric temperament, as it causes great harm; hence, neither night watchmen nor those with cold head ailments should use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are afflicted often become numbness, and for this reason the bladder must be placed slightly lower due to suspicion of compliance.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventilation within the neck is on the surface of the sinus and the basilica, and therefore it extends to pain in the limb, and tearing of the channel of the pancreas, and all over, and distension; and little force should be used, for if held too firmly, injury or stomach and heart may occur.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventilation through II ribs of the neck causes pain in the head, otalgia and migraine, strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth; it is on the surface of the sinus of the basilica; and you must instruct the nurse to express his hand when inserting, that he does not cut the artery, nor bleeding occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	that n’d c un les mains the:
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The hernia of the shoulders is an illness that arises from heat and distension.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosation of the elbows is as much as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the ligator not to pierce too deeply, for the joint is close by bone, and contains veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cushion which is above the buttocks also serves for hemorrhoids and disorders below, and it must be large and made of linen, needing to be well rubbed; and sometimes, if it were too delicate, it might break; causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the veins of the legs swell openly, they draw blood from all over the body; they are effective for ancient pains of cold rain, and urination, and bladder problems; and they relieve the throbbing of the two shinbones, and both ankles, and in any case, they weaken the body after long use, bringing pain to various dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cuff is that you first put it on an empty vein and quickly squeeze it off, then place it hastily, and move evenly, continuing without stopping until you see the redness and swelling of the vein, and blood appears pink; then release, remove the cuffs, and observe the body'cuish position because there are some who have tanned skin and clear pores: if it is necessary to prick only once, make wide and somewhat deep incisions; squeeze gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to make a fine opening for the thick blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the bone is very thin, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we only do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we desire much blood, repeat often; and if the vein is wide, pierce deeply, and terminate so that the vessel be cut swiftly, and it is fitting for those with thick and hard skin, and who are prone to inflammation, to anoint the elbow joints with oil aperitif and dissolutive: if this is so, use violet or almond softening oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is a wound, use cress or lily of the valley, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of aniseed, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If the one whom you treat has a tender and wide throat, there is no need to apply oil, but after the ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or gourd plant water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should rise easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with large swellings should rise from old wine, or blackthorn berry water, or anet root decoction, or chamomile, or other similar substances; and they must not be bled before the bath nor during it but one hour after the bath, and they must not sleep after ventilation, as they need to sweat when due for bleeding.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And beware of those who are pale and colicky, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary for them to ingest cooling things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuces with ease, and similar items; mint preserves, chestnut cake, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And those with a cold complexion should ingest syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, along with small portions, mint preserves, pignons, little birds, and turtledoves; and for the day they rest, they must drink more than eat. It is necessary to give some individuals triacle or musk before ventosation or afterward to strengthen the main limbs, but be subtle with their blood intake, only those who are too hot should consume it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are placed without causing harm are those put on the liver and kidneys, and gout, and on the belly, bowels, groin, and ankle, for these limbs do not suffer to be touched anywhere, but only done so in order to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as we place them on the nipples when they are healing; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and anus to reduce the limb; and relieves pain when there is obstruction or stone, so it may draw out the blockage by chance, or leave the stone from its original location; and thus works when placed on the liver and kidnecups when viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are arranged to empty as much as possible; and sometimes they are filled with steam, and sometimes with plain water, such as in illnesses of pleurisy, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or water that has boiled herbs suitable for it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of filling the blister with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should have two fingers wide and a half palm at the base, and around the vein insert a small needle hole as if to push in a needle, and use thread made of silk, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and around there should be a cross-threaded wire or iron, for placing a candlewick, and they should vary in size large and small depending on the diseases and nature of those who take them; because children's cupping sets are different from old ones, and lighter than fatter.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this is how you should apply the cupping glass to the limb: take a waxed candle or tallow and insert it through the cross-threaded wire which is within the cupping set, so that its glow does not burn the patient at the bottom of the cup; then place the glass on the limb, and ensure that underneard there is the small hole we have mentioned, so that when desired, steam will come off, and you can remove the cupping set; then take the tallow as before, and begin again frequently, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the cupping which is applied for pleurisy disease, in freshness, it has no penis or scrotum, and it is made only when filled with water, and is placed on the limb fully. And this is how it looks like:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without cupping, they are applied only to limbs where you cannot place cups due to smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; also in nude flesh like the genitals, and others; and their quality is that when you find cups filled with pure soft water, take them; put one at a time into soft water until they become accustomed, without anything in their bellies; then let it bleed and apply cupping again, rub the limb until it turns red, and place the cups; and once they are full and adhere, if you can place a cup there, do so, because it is greatly beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, raise the joint with ease, then apply much water, and afterwards press; and if the vessel is still swollen after removing from the body without a sinew, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the bone is compressed; and if there are multiple fractures, use powdered vitriole or gales, among other things, until they are compressed; now put two-thirds of peeled leeks on it, leaving them until they harden to the joint, which will compress it now; and if you need more liniments, take others.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 If the bones do not begin to knit, rub the joint with fresh blood or insert a needle until it pierces through, and then place them on top; as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden; when you see that they are oozing, powder some aloe and sage broth, or ash, upon them, which will cause them to become solid.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This book of fractures begins
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they involve the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn from this treatise, oh wise man, that the foolish may be enlightened by its teachings, which you will never find in any of the ancient books or letters read; and for this reason, knowledge is strange on our land, as I have found no good examples; although I know nothing unless through the wisdom of ancient texts, with which I have studied so much that I have mastered their knowledge, and by experimentation, and from the habits of my life; and herein I describe to you what is contained within this chapter, summarizing it at its end, and clearly showing the forms of remedies applied as shown in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or preface of this book the essence of its words and chapters in which the wise place their understanding, staying close to truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or torsion or swelling in any part of the body, it is necessary to bind the patient on both sides if nothing covers them entirely, as with frailty of limbs or infants or elderly; and if the time is not too warm or too cold; and consume chilled broths such as poultry and veal stock, do not drink wine or any fatty soups, and do not fill yourself up excessively with meats that cause blood vessels to be filled, until you no longer have doubt of an abscess or discharge of matter from the limb; then it is time for the patient to rest as they are accustomed.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, one should nourish the patient with foods that promote growth, such as those causing viscosity (as cooked wheat in water), beets, eggs, liver, veal stomach, and offal, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar items.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	In certain cases of dislocation, movement is restored quickly but then fractures occur soon afterward.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that old and decrepit bones cannot be well mended or welded according to their nature for the strengthening of limbs, nor those as in young children's; but do not care, reset on the broken bone with large tongs which are strong and join the member together until it becomes firm like before; and there is nothing left from your work, and therefore you must nourish them with fat meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	to (a:
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	The fractures of the head are different from those of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that resemble an arch, and others like sharpening wood, similar to the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that's just a tiny split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each way has its own device and instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind at the time; and it is known that a bone is broken by how much the joint is twisted, clearly bent out of place, and under pressure from hand manipulation; but if there is no twisting or catching, and the patient does not feel great pain unless there is a fracture. But he may well have twisting, or splitting, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	; d the so plee ond;
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which is in suspense, and are the two parts disjointed, they must now be set evenly, just as if an abscess were to come; and if an abscess arises, leave it for no day until it is soothed; then set it even to movements you can move easily and gently, and know that its restoration is easier than the one where there are pieces; then strain, as it should be hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if the bone is broken into pieces, divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or a small member, or to your hand, if it's one cord, or a single cord and your hand; then place the limb according to its natural figure so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them by all means back into their places with movements you can do, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain to the patient; and align well the two ends of the bone in accordance with the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if the patient's hand feels not quite right to you: clean it well, and do not strain or press it too much as those who bring forth abscesses and constrictions through their work often have done, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is at a standstill, chastise the patient well so they do not move, neither in wakefulness nor sleeping, nor turning, or any other way; and ensure that the limb is secure enough that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, it is not at a standstill, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and ensure that it is placed straightly, so as to avoid any twists if restored; the quality of the injured limb depends on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	That broken limbs vary in size and extent and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For small members such as arms and legs: you must wrap them with soft fine linen; for larger ones like hips and thighs: use a wide sturdy bandage, as the wider bandages encompass the entire limb evenly so there are no imbalances; then place light padding around it three or four turns depending on the member, then hold one end of the bandage tight for the whole length, then move to above the break and loosen slightly, with the break moving slightly away from the body; then gradually soften the bandages little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy portion, then use another bandage and return directly over the broken area; then go back to the area below the break, and tighten moderately, not too hard or too loosely as we have said in the first instruction above; then place linen strips between the bandages so they are all even, then wrap everything with a belt upwards until it is covered completely, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing ointment to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days; then bind with bandages of moistened broad leather strips, or wood made into splints, or palm fronds, according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 However, it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others; and as long as required for limbs of small or large size; then bind with bandages as you did in the initial setting, then tie above a thread promptly, similarly to the first setting over the fracture; tighter is less. It must be that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, like I have seen in works where people make their rope knots from flax cords, it is a great error, as the splint cannot be evenly spaced if they are too fine.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the nails after pulling them out in their healthy places, then apply cotton or cloth scraps between them so they do not pierce through.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment as follows.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember that it does not require extracting all splinters from the fractured limb on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limb is large, it must not be set with splints too soon after V or VII days, or more depending on the risk of a sudden abscess; and here is the ancient way to restore breaks, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that stands as if by the walls of a mill, mix it with much egg white, and make this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, for use. This is the common method of the splint restoring broken bones in various positions, especially among women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of ointment for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take resin, laudanum, elecampane root, asafoetida, gum arabic, etc., about 12 parts; myrrh and aloes, about 5 parts; benzoin .viiij. parts; and in a powder form, honeycomb with beef fat; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this ointment as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another splint method for torsion: take mugwort and cumin, in quantities of 10 by the horn; myrrh and aloes, in amounts of 9 by the horn; achillea, in volumes of 6 by the horn; bolus Armeniac, in volumes of 10 by the horn, and finely grind it. Then mix with water or abundant egg white to prepare.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of resetting dislocated joints and exposed bones is to find new ones; relieve the pain occurring, cut away the bone, and fracture: take fresh thread, and boil the wool in oil, and place it on the location.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These dressings do not heal but are good for cooling abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to set broken bones: take dry leaves of fig trees and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of dressing is to promote the healing of bone fractures and cool any remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, flour from honey; and grind it up, then mix with wine. If the limb is swollen, dilute with wet coriander water or plain water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of treatment more effective than the first, when an abscess comes to heal the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take the roots of wormwood, and flaxseed, balm, mallow, mustard seeds, and flowers from violets and chamomile, in equal parts; grind them together, then boil with salt water or freshwater, or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb for healing other than wax and oil mixture, and it should be of neither too hard nor too soft consistency.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And according to Galen, on must apply dry and slightly warm substances such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things for healing a broken limb, as we have said before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering for injuries and pain: take crushed mullein and chamomile flowers or feathers of birds, and wormwood, all in equal quantities, grind them together, and make the plaster with honey.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then loosen slightly after a while and be sure the patient feels no pain or has shifted any bones in their joints; do not loosen too quickly. If pain comes to the joint, or itching, with rest or swelling, act swifttly and loosen again, apply the poultice now; take light linen, a wet sponge, dip into water, lift up the limb until the itch ceases and the pain subsides; then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap in dry cloth wetted with water or oil rosset, tied under a nut until you are sure of high heat; and soothe inflammation of the joint and remove the pain, then resume gentle exercise, and apply some poultice again, but not as strongly as before; continue gently until fully healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and bandages, when you resume as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If it comes to the limb with nothing of what we have said, do not reset until after III days or IV or V or VII; and never leave it unset for XX days, as seen by the time when the breaker heals, and approaches the joint above; then you should hold it tighter than initially, and let the flesh swell, as I have mentioned before; and if you see that drying occurs more than necessary, know that no complications will arise; hence provide hot water frequently whenever you reset it, and do so every day, and moisten slightly often. This way, complications in the limb are avoided, and emulate promptly what skilled physicians do, who return the joint properly: this is harmful, and these procedures are fearsome, and I see nothing else but fatigue and proper work.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many ways of breaks are, and various forms, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks made by sword blows, where the bone is split through to the joint below the bone, as if made with an axe or cudgel; and therefore this type of break is called "axiless".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	it is not s and sentence of the f for:
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	If there is an impacted object, or crack or stone shards, or falling on stones, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a hernia that reaches the skin close to the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that has been sealed to the bone as delicate as mouse hairs, and it is a small fracture, therefore this type of break is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by being hit with a stone or falling, or other similar things, where part of the bone enters inside, and lies above like bellows when they are fired on the hearths; among them within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 This occurs more often in those who have wet bones like children's skulls, and it happens in all these ways of fractures where small pieces are not properly dealt with as such; and I will speak to them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures from the pull above them, and investigation with attempts, and by the corrupted cartilage which is below.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when an bone is discovered and rubbed over with heat, it shows the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, beware of any malaise by accident, and if you see no ill-fated accidents such as vomiting black bile, loss of mind, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an easily hopeful injury, and if you expect healing, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the swelling comes to you first, and it is in winter, then remove the bone after the fourteenth day on which you can move.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh underneath the bone becomes corrupted and come the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the fracture of the bone comes just below the skin that covers the brain, it is necessary to split the broken part thusly; and ensure that you expose as much skull as possible affected by the injury, revealing the bone in all ways you can, and on the wound's surface more than you can, with bleeding occurring when exposing the bone or abscesses appear. You should proceed according to what is necessary; then fill the cavity with moistened bandages soaked in oil of roses; let the wound rest until any pustules are calmed and you're certain about bleeding stopping; then begin around the bone, removing it as follows: one method involves cutting at a narrow opening in front, which is where the form lies.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision wider than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method involves having various types of pincers, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of iron wire; in light work, do not strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you drill around it, making indentations with tongs without piercing beyond the skull of the head, ensuring a margin or circle at the tip so that the point does not pass through the bone; and you must have several, so each comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, having tongs for all tests (types); these are the three ways of making tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for drilling around the bone is to place a tong on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tong slightly and do so all around, making a cut with the incisors between the punctures, doing this more delicately than possible, lightly, as we have said, until you come across the bone to your hand or any of the instruments that you have like pincers.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and cut, it is necessary to remove any protruding piece of the bone that resembles an instrument similar to a chisel; but it must be more securely fastened and finer than other instruments like it; and if there are no small bones or scale-like fragments remaining, gently use with ointments and bandages as we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is what the Galenians call it, which is more effective; and this one is very strong, and that's my word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and once you have uncovered that part, place it under the top of this lens-shaped instrument; which has the following shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut away from the sides, and it is an inflamed part in two ribs, so that the cutting tool faces the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet underneath, so that you chip the entire bone lightly without harming the covering tissue above it; if it's loose to the bone, loosen the bone slightly, as doing otherwise may cause damage and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and is cut slightly above, with small pieces remaining, you must treat that severity again, and remove scales using a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities in order to apply most conveniently at each location according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If using many large razors first, then more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must treat according to their directionality; and this is something not easily repaired by those who have devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the face is uncovered, it is necessary that you pick a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and grease with oil rose, and place it over the wound; then take another padded bandage folded in two or three layers, and grease with wine and oiled rose, and place it above the first bandage; and do this gently so as not to burden the face, afterwards apply from below other remedies, and do not stretch it more than necessary for the wound alone; leave it like that for one or two days until the abscess swelling is calmed down, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, ground flaxseed, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; from these things make a fine powder, place it on the ward, and administer additional medicines without irritation; and ensure that the wound remains clean, so you do not leave any grease or debris inside.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore be cautious, if anything unexpected comes to the patient as we have mentioned, it is questionable without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness comes not from the medicine applied there, but to ensure its virtue, you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil mixed with woolen cloth, then apply it on the swelling; then care for it as needed until it becomes healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Sections that are never broken above or below the neck, for they are two bones; and one is cartilaginous and does not break but twists or folds, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must tie a small bandage or cloth near the neck, and place the break inside your index finger's sheath, then up to the throat on the other side, until the vein returns to its natural shape; do this gently, ensuring the patient feels no pain from your procedure.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the neck and cannot bring the thumb to its place, it should be set as level with a small piece of wood.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, do likewise again, and hasten to repair it within one day if you can; if not, after seven or eight days when the swelling has subsided, then bandage near the neck with linen strips of cloth, if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another from the other side, if there is a fracture therein; and let the sutures be so large that they fill the pores with blood.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some surgeons say one must pull out the threads with butter, and change them daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems to me that this may not be the best course of action, but it should be done with a mixture of egg white and powdered miller's flour, then leave the thread alone until the bone is fully healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time should one put goose feathers on the suture site, and if there is a cloth bandage around it, and hold the breakage, and blow away the bad spirits; as you see fit do so.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess occurs in the nose while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton ball soaked in rose oil or a bit of diaconicon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess does not form, apply the paste afterward, consisting of wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place it on light gauze bandages without using pitch; and if a fracture to the nose is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract the fragments as appropriate for this case, then make an incision, and heal other complicated wounds such as char and soldering, like plasters and ointments suitable for that, and if there are no internal injuries of the nostrils, cure with threads, and apply linen strips until it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of fracturing of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured from below and there is no open wound, and the breakage is only slight, because there are bones inside, if you see it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	the c.jir et i est th: Jus are m; Flemra t le ouf s deme with T9 (C. Ise bente la loro qu's and that; y n'llu;
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	When the fracture of the lower jaw is dislocated on both sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension by two parts until they are levelled.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If there are movements of the spine or dislocations, then strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk; then place on the broken jaw a cerot, and place over it a double cloth; then place a large well-made pillow, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, attached securely where you wish, and command the patient to rest and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure is changing, and then dislocate it again within three days, and then set it back to how it was changed; then place a poultice over it with finely ground powder or wheat flour after removing the cerot; then cover the poulture lightly, and if the poultice swells, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be so until he is well; many times has been well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	When an abscess occurs, follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no bone fragment remains; delicately remove the surrounding tissue as advised above.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it to fit with your bandage as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have set all the pieces of bone, and it does not stay in place at all, so cover the wound if it is wide, and apply .i. stable splints to hold, for healing, until it becomes sound.
de la forcele	The strengthening of muscles
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fractures break several times before the shoulder, and the breaks are in three ways: one is broken and separated into two parts, and there are fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Et the work is such when there is a fracture without a wound, so you need two assistants, one who treats the dislocated shoulder that feels weakness; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture to your arms equally, so that it forms as it should, with no appearance or lopsidedness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or wool, and it should be thick according to your necessity; stretch and ease the dislocation, hold the rod in their hand, so that they align the fracture equally as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation forward because it comes out on both sides, then let the patient lie down on their stomach, and place under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow; then the assistants lift the shoulder upwards until the bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the break of your arm, and if you find any fragments, it is necessary to split them; and pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, use a tool from one of the incisions that you have made; but place it under the fulcrum, for this instrument will prevent slippage.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it appears as a spoon, and is not straight but wide as needed according to the size of the bone and strength of the work; and have two angles, as you see, one wider and the other narrower, as dictated by the wound from when you set the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the contour is small or there is doubt about it being a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	When an abscess occurs there, if it fills with pus, then apply a cloth soaked in oil rose-colored and medicinal wine, and place upon it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The tightening of the bone when it is without wounds and without movement, you should put on the bone plaster with powdered wheat meal and fat from eggs, then place light bandages over it, and use a large sponge underneath if needed; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, and place double gauze over the bandages and plaster; then take a fine strip three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and place the strip over the fracture, turning the bandage upwards from the collarbone to below it, and from the healthy shoulder to the injured one; tie each part together, and when you see that the ligatures hold the fracture firmly enough, change them every day until they are loosebut, if not used correctly. Let the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow underneath the collarbone to lift the injured shoulder; this will relieve the pressure from the strain by adjusting the position of the shoulder, or you can tie the arm to the neck as long as no bad accidents occur until twenty days; then restart the plaster if needed and keep it on like that until fully healed; usually restored in twenty-eight days, but some less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of a broken shoulder blade
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Often it happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated and should not be moved except by touch; then arrange according to the nature of the breakage, and reset in its natural form in all ways possible; then put on a powder made from finely ground flour with plenty of water, along with light bandages, then cover with two layers; then place a wide and subtle board slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring the joint does not move anywhere on the shoulder, so tighten it with linen thread evenly; and then strain firmly for a long time until the board does not move from its spot, observing the ligaments every day; each time if there is loosening, reinforce, and adjust the board if necessary to maintain position, while patients rest on their side; thus the shoulder can be restored in 20 days or 25 days. When these numbers are completed, release it, but be careful, as it's not bone that moves lightly again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes without breaking through the skin, and heals over, causing swelling and pain, then do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed wound to soothe it.
de la brisure dou pis	From breaking of the shin bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The fish is sometimes broken on the spit, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken on the spit, if it leans to one side, the patient feels great pain, weakness, and numbness, as well as perhaps vomiting blood, and cracking in the broken bones, and he feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing is that the patient lies on his back, and a pillow is placed between the shoulders, then press down on the shoulders, and binds the ribcage with both hands, doing so in all possible ways until it is rightly aligned; then place casts and padding over the broken bone gently, either with salt or another light substance, and wrap it in a piece of cloth so that it stays still; then return to the normal position on his back, and loosen gradually as needed, and let out each suture after an hour'amo, and if it becomes loose, re-tighten it; and if it needs to be undone for corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, do so quickly, remove what is there, and apply suitable treatment methods; then unwrap the casts, and tighten them as needed until healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	One must know that rib fractures occur in the large ones behind and above the spine, and they only bend due to being brittle; and one feels it well at the joints of the back.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the repair is that you set the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply the splint, and restrain with a stake if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	lesse de leur ne le t.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And those who say that it should be treated with foods that inflate the stomach in order to push aside the rupture on the other side.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	And we do not make this that becomes cold, as long as it is brought to us, if it has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if one finds it there, then it must be set right.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that applying cups to the place creates sweating, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups may attract excessive fluids to the area due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	; that mesme le se mar: a big they est not m (and there
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain from the pointed bone that they cannot bear, causing doubt in them, then it is necessary to fissure at the location of the broken ribs, and it must be placed under a tool for support; thus, one should cut the bone, draw lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess comes forth, then place it on moistened linen cloths with oil of roses, and put them in position; treat while keeping the area clean as needed for an abscess, and let them lie on their back or side as appropriate until healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is no time for fractures of the bone in the neck and it does not occur that it bends; also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, observe carefully if their hands become softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick the fingers with a needle, if they feel nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that they have been made numb in several ways, and if you move them and they feel well when strained and not, know that the bone joint is safe, and the patient will be healed with care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 If such things come to the spine of the back and you must know if it is sane or not, take care if the joints are softened, and if there are injuries that require hands, along the back there may be a flapping like wind and involuntary evacuation; and when it has been sovined on its belly, it also ejects involuntarily.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is sovined on its back and wants to stand up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Say that they are deadly: do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the condition is more mild.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	When the cure is that if there is an abscess hot, apply oil of rosemary or olive oil until it is soothed; then place under one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with cloth; then reposition the two edges of the wound, if large, with stitches, then treat with soothing oil until healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as "the shoulder of the cow," put your pouch in your left hand, place it evenly against your right palm for stability, then apply a poultice and bandage if needed; then immobilize, and if there are dislocated bones, treat them, realign, and care for the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For breaking of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there's no need for slight reduction at the top; and they are long, and descend towards the pelvis, and come with pain at the site, swelling, and breaking further.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it as long as it's over the break; and identify what kind of fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only on top, then balance this break to make it naturally shaped.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it slopes towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie down on their stomach until the restoration of that break is ready.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place properly, then set it on the plaster cast, and next to a wooden or metal stake, holding the break steady so that it does not move; and fill the space under the ribs until they are level again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to lie on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears there, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided; then proceed as we have previously instructed; and return to restoring normal function, holding steady as necessary unless there is any complication; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what lie between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, you should reset it according to one of the two methods: wherein one is that you take a plain iron rod as thick as this.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And fasten two pins on each side, and place the patient under one of them; then pour some liquid onto the broken bone over the rod until it reaches the joint, and have a curved piece of wood in midway, then rest it against any object or let the servants hold it down; then put splints on either side of the break equally, as if clasped together, until the fracture is properly set.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	Sze; the cest the ou d s the bente but  by this in the resulting the ca; they arentin contcme thestronce mil que (alsot; and so t1 s strait se t
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is further out, restrain the ligaments below the break, and at the break, and extend each member to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it is fitting that you place a splint under the bone, and another on top of the arm, below the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the arm, you must lightly apply a splint without strain until the fracture aligns with its original position and the arm, as appropriate, then realign the fracture and stabilize it unless an abscess occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess occurs, do not secure it until six days have passed and apply a moistened cloth with oil rose to soothe the abscess; then set the ligature, ensuring that you place an immobilizing splint over the break, align the arm above the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast. Wrap the bandage and secure it at the shoulder joint and the arm, allowing the arm to rest properly unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not aligned.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt if the bone is not moving, use a more robust and wider than the other straps, and have between each strap two inches long, and be so wide that it passes over the break, then tighten the wrappings as I said at beginning on the chapter of this joint.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the seat of abscesses and strangulation, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt an abscess forming, leave it bandaged until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days to ensure no prickling or swelling occurs at the location or nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If placed as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 If no such accidents occur, do not dislocate until after at least three days or more, and the patient sleeps on their back with hands placed on their stomach; and put two cushions of plain linen evenly under the shoulder, and watch each hour during the day and night so that the broken limb does not move or soften the ligaments; do it by the virtue of medicine, and give them flesh as we have mentioned before, in such a way that the meat is first subtle; and when they begin to regain strength, it should be plump.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be repositioned within 40 days altogether; then you should dislocate them again and administer baths and ointment medicines to correct their positioning.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 If the stricture is unpleasant and swoln, let it stay dislocated for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	For a fractured arm, wrap the limb with an evenly made pillow of linen under it; then observe each hour during the day and night to ensure proper healing without excessive movement or swelling. If necessary by medicinal means, give them nourishing food as we have previously mentioned, so that their strength is replenished gradually.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one is small and supports the elbow; the other is large, and is located below it towards the smaller joint; sometimes only the large foscile is broken, or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small veins are broken, restoration is easy and healing; but when large ones are broken, it's poor healing, more severe than all together breaking.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only the small veins are broken, slight extension and equalization is required.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it's the large vein, then stronger extension is required; extend over one week, and stretch the hand pouch higher than others, while small vessels should be lower than others, cross them on itself, with the cushion in front of him raised higher so that the patient feels no pain; then extend fingers apart from each other near to the area above his hand or tendon, with another set perpendnent.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the mirrors evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece back to its original position, and if any are out of order that touch the bone, and cannot be restored to their original position, then make a cut around it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a break with a wound, I have discussed this individually with the surgeon; take that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if during the beginning of restoration abscesses occur, use a glue plaster made of rose oil and white wax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; apply the plaster delicately over all abscesses until they are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then apply the plaster, and use a powdered paste with plenty of egg white to make the splints, ensuring they are more reinforced and slightly wider than the others; there should be VI splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; strain more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less when aligning as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; the dressings over the fracture are soft and moist, not hard or rough; use threads for binding that are made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And restore the limb and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident befalls the limb, as itching that comes upon the limb, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is eased; and let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then resume the strapping, and if the joints are soothed and the bone is set, along with similar things, according to discretion.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and leave so for some days until the swelling subsides, then resume the binding.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said comes upon the patient, do not reset the dislocation until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or if you must, then place the hands on his neck and they shall be evenly balanced, and guard against movement and rolling over; he sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or XXXV, and possibly in XX days, according to the compositions and qualities of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	Of a fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is said that on the back of the hand and in the knuckles are few fractures, but many times they are sprained.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or sprained, it is necessary for the patient to cross his fingers, and sit them straight ahead evenly; then he places his hand on an extended table, and extends the broken bones, arranging them equally as they should be well joined; and applies a plaster and gauze, if abscesses are present, otherwise he puts a splint according to the quantity of it needed; and it is wrapped in .i. cloth made of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	c.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is too far gone, it is necessary to place a pillow above and another below on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then wrap it entirely around with a bandage, keeping the joints in between close.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to one of us at any joints, whether it is a sprain, position them equally as needed; and strain with pressure, and if you see fit, place a small straight pillow to lift the fracture without movement; and if the fracture is at other joints, like in the index or one of the others, align them evenly, and bind with healthy joints that are adjacent; or tie all together using one bandage, allowing for some mobility, or place a pillow underneath as needed; and be cautious during healing and abscess treatment, and also remove any swelling that occurs, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	For a broken thigh (femur fracture).
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and as it heals, one can see when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration involves using a leech above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each healer extends their hand equally to their side; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one ligament be towards the wrist and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And similarly if it is close to the knee, then let the ligaments be near the knee and its extension; then hold the bone evenly with both hands as per its natural shape, and then place a splint, without any pus coming forth.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, let it be soothed then return to your work and treatment; the lymph gland is made in part manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary to wrap over the fracture with a doubled or triple bandage and use any excess material; then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the knee, and thread a long filament between the thigh and leg near the knee without it being visible above. Then twist both the leg and thigh with the bandages, place an elevation at the fracture site, and put another elevation on the leg bone; then place padding made of soft linen between the leg and thigh to evenly distribute the pressure, and begin tying tightly with three or four turns above the fracture; as you move closer to the faster, apply less tension. Then return to below the head of the filament threaded through the leg and thigh, continuing until it reaches near the foot; if it does not move from its place, leave it that way, then remove anything abnormal or swelling appearing there.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if this happens, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that poke out, then one can easily remove them; and if they cannot be removed, it is necessary to cut the flesh, and pull through forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the tail broken as when one inserts pins in it, like with shoulders and arms; however, in such restoration made, it does not always calm the patient's ailments.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the tail is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the pathway through the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that at the groove of the neck there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, there is not much but a crack or piercing, which leads to all wounds, feels of wounds, and this smells very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one places equally what is crooked in its joints so that they can be moved as desired; then place the splint and if needed, put a round pole for support, and hold it as it should be, then attend to all the preparations we have mentioned for other breaks, abscesses, etc., applying appropriate treatment for each condition until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	For the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one called "muscles" and the other called "fibula"; all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and thus is the restoration likewise, and the workings are all there. And if both bones break together, the leg turns in all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a delicate bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be clearly seen; and it becomes deformed.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then arrange for extension and set it evenly, and tie the bandages equally; however, it must be ensured that there is no unsightly fracture, and sometimes there are fragments, so make the extension minor and easier; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your treatment, take two strips of wood covered in linen on one side and the other that are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them both around, binding it firmly so that the leg may not turn left or right, which is good; and no one administers a bandage along the length of the leg made of wood, instead they position the leg for protection against movement, properly treating the break where there is injury; and move each day the leg to see if there is swelling or any other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot breaks and occasionally it shifts slightly without causing any severe displacement or issues.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it occurs with the broken bone of the foot, and you see these bones rising towards each other, place such weakened pieces of wood on the ground, as if they were to go there; now put your own foot under theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and stuffing underneath, and place a small tablecloth with two flat edges over the belly of the broken foot, then strain it back into position, and once wrapped in bandages around, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, release the ligaments, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any broken bones, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place an iron bar on each side according to the length of the bone, and make it a bit wider, then place the small tablecloth that I mentioned under the belly of the foot, and straighten it back into position; and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, put a bar on each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the tablecloth under the belly of the foot, so that they should be well aligned.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said for other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be done.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For a fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if she can sit upright, then lean her back towards the painful area and be supported from behind; next fill the balm with cotton as large as it fits; then have the woman stand up slowly bit by bit, and once the cotton slides in to the entrance of the nature, returns with the cotton; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, let it return, and so do this for seven days or more: if done correctly, the fracture will be restored. If you wish, take a hare's bladerocket, tie some woolen cloth at its neck, then fill the entire bladder into the nature; then blow air through the hole in the rocket until the bladder is empty: the nature will return to normal. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for several days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the forearm is broken, in men or women, restore it as we have said about the hipbone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and use to this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For broken bones indicate various conditions that can affect the proper path of restoration: therefore, let us consider.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the penis; then wrap with linen around, and leave for three days or as many nights, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fractures accompanied by wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bones of the hip or shoulder, that they be set right now, so that the methods we have mentioned bear witness to their healing.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound but there are remains of glass powder, unless you have something else, then begin again to reset the fracture in that same hour or day, unless an abscess arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess arises, leave the resetting until a new moon, as long as the abscess is soothed, and do not approach it on the following day or the fourth part of that time, for otherwise you would bring about a bad incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken and appears beneath the skin exposed, it must be gently aligned by hand with slight pressure to extend it.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear suitable to be put in place by hand, then use this instrument made of iron with six or eight prongs and its width according to the size of the wound; thus it is necessary for the surgeon to grasp three or four (prongs), depending on how many are needed for each fracture treatment; let them be smooth and slightly thickened so they do not bend under pressure on the limb at your work, with one end pointed forward, and thicker in front of it:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And they are called "palianche," so it is necessary to place the curved needle on the top of the visible bone; and move it once until it returns, keeping them equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and muscles cannot properly grip the bone, then it is necessary to cut off the top of the bacteria, so that the muscles can have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with the cap of an appropriate instrument, either cutting or sawing, to your ability; then remove what is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 When the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If it is put back to its place and a sticky black ointment applied properly, do not apply anything else or oil on the wound that may cause rot and decay; then provide remedies once you have restored the bone, leave the wound exposed, cover it entirely according to the quantity of the wound, and ensure it is well protected so the wound is not strained with the fracture; many times, this has been done by madmen and caused harm or death at least once; the tightening should be milder and gentler than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt whether an accident occurred that caused it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not put any bandages; instead wrap around it with durable cloths and secure them in place near the area of the injury.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And if after one or two days you see swelling at the wound and what you applied is no longer effective, then apply healing salve to the injury as a tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar substances.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is well-settled and healthy again.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be fitted with an appliance so that the bow can bend slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after three days it still cannot heal and remains loose like this because there are small bone fragments causing the pain, then you must cauterize the wound with a tent (or cover) and remove all those superfluous bones that cause the suffering.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula occurs at the site, or any other type of decay, it is necessary to treat it as described in this chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And if the bone is fractured and exposed in the limb, as with the hip or shoulder, and other similar large body parts, do not attempt to treat it, for many times death occurs, but leave it until it hardens; after a certain number of days (XX or XXX), then heal the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruises that come about the hernia
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come upon this after the healing of the hernia, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant sight is seen in the limb's appearance; and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then beware if the joint is stiff: if you administer medicinal substances like aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, and resin, or any similar things, whether you choose one of these ingredients or all together, and mix them with astringent wine, or an abundance of honey or oil; then place it in a gauze pouch, tightly bind it without untying during the day; then dislocate it again, and start over with another until the inflammation is gone; or strain on a well-formed piece of wood; because the property of the wood is that it dispels swelling above the limbs; and if the inflammamo
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after childbirth
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fiches are too many and weakly as it is proument: or li brisure of the eaument; for in such a lays; ne poite laisse; et desuirnent trop quarrerement multitudes et s, et ce il est de pierre.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the patient eat, and keep the body supple, until the blood multiplies within them; and administer baths, and give joy and laughter; then apply poultices to the limb so that the poultice draws significant nourishment to it, and often raise it with warm water, until the swelling recedes from the limb; then let it return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	And if the member remains twisted after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	And if the member remains twisted after healing, and the bones are broken apart, and the shape of the limb is unattractive: however, do not believe the foolish who say that you must break off the entire limb anew, as many a madman has done on our land; such procedures are blameworthein, and they bring great harm, and sometimes death. Nevertheless, if the knots and twists are fresh, it is necessary to raise them with warm water, or mollifying herbs that have been cooked, like milk thistle leaves, roots, and meal of millet, and such things; and you make a .i. soothing poultice, as good as diaquilon, and take the musk of milk thistle, and mix it with linseed oil or sesame seed oil fat, and apply the poultice; or take figs' fatnesses, and grind them with flaxseed flour, and similar medicines that soothe stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 At no time is bone dislocated by continuously and lengthily rubbing with damp hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And make sure to allow some movement in the affected limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted and hardened curvature is like stone, it also needs to be pried with iron, up to the bone; using a delicate incision tool gently; then apply poultice and study in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocamen
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	t; that a. <l; and (pr; if the bon nd ; bys c; they has not s; after the ou; with the d. The car; but the la fleteze them bolecks, or other; the qut;
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if it is necessary now bring back gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if you delay and the limb swells, and perhaps it is difficult to put back in place; therefore, one must not move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times this brings buboes and other pains; however, when this occurs, treat the patient well, then leave them as long as the inflammebg lesions are calmed; then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then move it gently, and heal each member as treatment comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	f:
des mandibules	Of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated outward, and the dislocation can occur in two ways: either they are slightly misaligned from their place and softened a bit; or they are completely dislodged, hanging toward the worse side, causing saliva to spill from the mouth which it cannot contain, preventing closure of the mouth and swallowing of the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	Dislocation: ous les jawbone are they come uncuit enclosed properly to be removed from their place, et can heal them do not open up it so that out the saluties of mouth ou is too loosy and dislocated or reposition li close enough bone at lade with the teeth aligned: either as for it done and are they dose the estriven, you to remain properly in position. Dislocation until from place; they are not dislocations can be their own has come outrainsurgeon.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is complete and accomplished, one must reset it promptly, without hesitation, in a manner that the assisting hand touches the patient's head, and inserts two fingers into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is between both sides; the other hand should also be placed to balance. Instruct the patient to soften their jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And on it so, with warm water, et pours.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if resetting is difficult, especially when both jaws are together, soak in warm water and oil, until they can be gently moved; do not push too hard while resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth feels well softened, place moistened cloths in a cushion made of rose oil and wax; then lightly bind their head with soft ties. Lay the patient on his back, with his chin resting between two pillows so that he does not move left or right nor strain to eat; but encourage easy food consumption until pain subsides, and mandibles are swoln out and sanitized; then give him a light meal, without attempting to open the mouth for eating and drinking while the mandibles remain well plumped and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set back to their proper position within an hour and are not restored to their original places, fevers and usual sweats may occur, along with possible intestinal issues or unadulterated vomiting by chance.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then declare that it is a calamity; and many times those who experience it die within seven days.
de la forcelle	Of forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot dislocate the ribs within and below, nor is it ever dislocated without feeling.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then firmly press the joint with your palm, and it will return; then put something underneath and the binding, and strain it; and the shoulder which is towards you cannot dislocate again; if not, and if it does dislocate once more, reset the joint to its place as we have said; then put something undernevee and the bandage, and hold steady for the patient to rest until healed; thus similarly restore the collarbone when displaced from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 The shoulder can dislocate in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the shin area; and the second is to the calf part; sometimes it dislocates upwards, but this occurs rarely; nor does it ever dislocate backwards or inside for nerves; occasionally it dislocates downwards towards the ankle, especially in those with little flesh as they do so quickly; in those with enough flesh, it dislocates slightly and returns easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to certain men from a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that when the dislocation descends towards the axilla, there is a difference between the affected and healthy shoulder, and you will find their distinctiveness manifest; and at the head of the shoulder, you will find a hollow, and below the axilla as close to the top of the shoulder blade, similar to that it were an ear; and the patient cannot bring his hand near its nest, nor make any movements; similarly, if dislocated upward, it is not concealed, for you can clearly see it by touching; and this type of dislocation is not solely reset when new or if a child feels ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner of the dislocated arm, then lift it upwardly the hand and put in its upper side as a ligni les poins duos; et le mete la mains de l’est en haut, li maugrontes pois mete poinz los.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in the past days, then the patient should be bathed with warm water; and rubbed gently and soothed, like an infusion of althea and fenugreek and flaxseed in water, and thus treated; then lay the child on their back, and place a bandage under the shoulder that is equal neither too soft nor too hard, then tie the strap to the sole of the foot, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and stretch the hand towards the sick one; another method has someone dye the top of the shoulder, so it does not move downward; that shoulder returns quickly now, and if you see the joint reset this way: have an adult present who is larger than the child; stand opposite their back, and place a bandage under the dislocated shoulder, lift the shoulder upwards, so the child hangs in the air; another method has someone stretch the hand towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, add to him any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the resetting is done in another way: and it's like a long stick driven into the ground, from which the head rises just as with an arrow, neither too large nor too small; then place it underneath the patient, but that he be clothed above, and let the arm be extended on the opposite side normally; then the joint will return to its place quickly. And if it does not want to return for all these reasons we have mentioned, make this treatment: take a stick two arms long with four fingers wide at the top, so that the head can enter straight under the knee as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then cover the long trunk with cloth to prevent it from touching the sick person, then place the sick person below the seat and position the arm alongside the long trunk; extend the arms above the trunk, and fix the shoulder on top of the trunk, placing the hand at the head end of the arm, then insert the arm under a rib of one row widthwise, and extend the hands downwards, allowing the body to hang on the other side: the joints will return immediately.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in any manner whatsoever, it must be that you place over the joint a spindle of wool equal, then apply the plaster prepared with powder from milling, with incense and oven hawk's egg, on all the shoulder and around it; then strain off the plaster quickly, turn the sling onto the plaster, and wrap the hand at its neck, so that the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be that you eat little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; if it becomes firm and not softened, then it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 If the joint is forcibly out of place due to moisture or another cause, it must be treated with three small fire cauteries as described in this chapter on cautery techniques.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you perform all of this and it remains dislocated for over seven days, and the joint does not hold or lift the arm forward, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is pinched or stretched out or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be properly aligned in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the left side and the muscles, or behind, is caused by impact, elongation of hands, and other ligaments; treat until it is healed properly.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes tremors in the limb, and later twinges of movement, the patient suffers many times until those tremors subside, returning to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder joint dislocation from a fall
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the shoulder joint dislocation occurs at points and returns to those points; when it has dislocated from all parts, especially in front and behind, the dislocation cannot be properly reset as one can clearly see and feel it, and it dislocates according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the affected limb with its healthy counterpart, if it is clearly visible.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	. I ben ta the:
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: when it can be returned in such a way, extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the fingers wrapped around according to the course of the cord, behind and above, joining the joint with its bones together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, when it doubles its hand to its own hand and wraps the cord's root of the palm which has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to place, administer strong extension; and have two assistants extend the arm, holding the elbow joint firmly during extension; then turn the arm from each side after wrapping a long, wide double cloth around it; and when the patient is ready for the joinery of the joint with his hand, apply any oil to soften the joint before resetting forcefully until it returns; and once it is in place, place it under dry gauze with wheat bran powder, compress firmly, and support the arm on a pillow near the affected side, then leave as instructed.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start again with the dry paste and bindings, and let them be for some days until they are firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 If after resetting the joint it feels unstable and moves, then bathe it well and press until soothed; or put greasy mutton fat on the joint, leave for a day and night, then dress it, and let it have its bath; when it sweats, rub the joint vigorously, then replace the fat, and give it another bath; do this twice or three times until healed; if you see, put moistened wheat flour warmed with butter on it, and strain over.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs and its return is easy compared to other joints as well; it must be promptly returned to its place at the same time it is dislocated, whether the flesh is swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The repositioning is that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend their fingers and align them so they can put their palm over the joint area, holding it until normal position is restored; then check if it is correctly placed. Afterward, instruct the patient to rest his back of his hand on the table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, instruct the patient to place their hand on a tabletop, and guide the physician's hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, that is right; if not, apply the soothing balm on abscesses and allow some time to begin healing again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If it cannot endure, and you have not been able to place it back in its proper position after several days, as the joint remains twisted; and nothing can be grasped with such hands that become weak and are unable to hold anything: then understand that a nerve or artery has been cut, or if there is no other solution than using cauterization near the wound, and perhaps it serves no other purpose.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, then place it on the splint as we have said, then strain and leave for 5 days, then release and keep thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply warm water lather, and rub until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Never are the two bones of the hand dislocated either at each end or at the palm's back or stomach; then they are dislocated, and you support the head of the joint until it reappears, then stabilize the top of the joint, and tilt toward the part where it is disconnected; leave it for two days, and then set it evenly on that day; and after doing so as we have said, dislocate the joint again, make it move, and reconnect it; do this often until it becomes tight, and perform the same with the stomach of the hand, and do so as you did before until it is straightened; and do likewise when dislocated on another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dilation of the spinal column of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several occurrences of it, there is no remedy, as death soon follows for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 The signs are that the ejections occur without voluntary movement, cannot be held, and many times certain limbs (either both thighs or one of the arms) become softened; often the spine moves in four parts; those that move at the back are called "gilbositez": treatment for this involves restoring it if gilbositez is from childhood, otherwise there is no cure or healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that come from falling or impacts or similar causes are treated by old methods using many words, which have little benefit; but I have refined it according to my intention and have formed extracts in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 In the gilboasis that comes on the chest front, there is no remedy or health; and likewise those that come straight into the ribs, and cannot be cured except in what directly comes to the back, as I say; and it is so that the patient should be laid flat with their face equal at one place, having strain off them, so they do not move; then stick a tinder on the head thoroughly, and another on the feet, and tie a leather strap around the asses of the sick person, and another on the thighs, and as genitals, and ankles; and two ministers know the straps, one at the head and the other on the feet, among the tinders; and they should be well tied, the tinder as we have said, and the physician puts his palms firmly on the spine properly, until it moves.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three fingers wide and long, place the patient on their side with the affected area facing up, position the head of the stick under the hip, then insert the middle part of the stick along the spine; place the ends of the stick against the other shoulder blade edge, and press firmly until it returns to its place. If you see an issue, adjust as needed for comfort like a turning torch handle.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you shall insert two pegs on the head of the malaide's arm and between their other fingers, spaced a hand's width apart; each peg should have one hole or more if needed for comfort, firmly secured in place so they do not move; among these pegs, there should be an additional turning peg where the ligaments turn, with two small holes of a hand's width to turn the lever; then tie the ligament that is among the joints to one lever arm towards the head and the other ligament towards the fingers on the opposite lever. The assistants will rotate their levers at all times as we have described, and the master aligns the spine equally.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are evenly aligned, place the dried herb with plenty of honey, then packs, then the splint from a tablet of three ounces in length to secure the location of the dislocation and the part of the healthy spine, then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until healed; and if any thing arises at the end regarding health, one must administer softening and soothing medicines along with the splint that we have mentioned beforehand; and on no occasion insert plugs, nor does an appearance occur in the rear of the spine, and it seems like dislocations; this is due to bones separating, therefore there should be no presumption: perhaps it would cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip joint dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints only occur as such, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, and slightly forward or backward. And less so to either side.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer and opens more bone joints in the patient's bad side than their good, and they cannot double the thigh on fire; and the limbs are swoln near abscesses hot, because the hip of the buttocks moves towards them.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one to whom it comes upon, is such that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one to whom it occurs in front is such that they walk well on their leg according to completion; however, do not double the knee with pain, and if you want them to stand up, first ensure they can bend it, and hold urine retention, and swelling of the groin, and as they move forward, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	seg; c'sud leslso: 1 but they way the sole (et ce bon tous fjoss; e tella; that n’m (throchemde.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resets for this type of dislocation are that you should check if the dislocation is recent and it stays according to its nature, without any care; and it does not require haste or assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation: if you hurry to reset the joint, push it inside and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must assemble a strong minister and support the leg strongly with two hands or with ligaments that are tied above the thigh; while other assistants extend their hand over it so they place their hands under its saddle-bones, then grip them lightly with a string around the hip; and others tug on the neck tendon; and all pull upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four kinds; and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If this does not work, one must attend to its appearance when the dislocation is in the jawbone; it is necessary that you support the patient under their ribcage, then place a ligature on the hip joint root, and the displaced part which is below the groin, then extend the ligature towards the groin, and along the thigh; then engage other ministers to assist its arms, and embrace the large protruding part of the affected hip, and stretch it out fully: it will return to its place now; this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, one must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong waxed ligature above the heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended further than the other; then hang from the head of a staff, and from the ground extend both arms fully; then command an assistant to embrace the pelvic region's top, and have others suspended with the patient, who firmly grasp the pelvis as well, for the joint will return swiftly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is in need of care, apply to the patient as we have described for those with gilbosities, and properly straighten it on the affected leg and foot; then place two tiles, one at the head and one under the feet; next insert a hot iron between the thighs near the deformed area; and wrap moist cloth around it so it doesn't move, then stretch out each minister towards him, and the mirror adjusts the dislocation to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place on a board and press as we have described for gilbosities, applying to the patient's healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; then place the physician's thumb above the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 If the dislocation is in its proper place, it does not need to stretch the patient downward or lift off the ground but must lie as if the joint was properly positioned when lying on the two pillows; and rests on its face, with the ligament extended as previously mentioned, and should be pressed against the joint surface; then, once the patient has straightened their legs and they are even, place buttocks close together, apply a splint, and secure with one bandage so that the joint does not move. After resting for three or four days, then release it, and apply a splint again; if you see them to be even, as before, leave it on for three more days, then release it, and let the patient walk gently until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For the dislocation of the knee joint.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: internally and downwards, and behind it; not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not reach the hip, declare it dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you have him sit up straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put your foot under his feet; then take his knee in your hands, retract between your thumbs, then bend both sides gently with the kneecap; and other assistants extend his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it slightly touches its hip correctly. Then apply a poultice on it, massage the leg against the hip, and tie them together firmly for III or IV days, then release him; do not allow the patient any movement until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not severely damaged, then strengthen it strongly as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully submerged, nor ever fully drained, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and attempt before reaching the part where it dislocates: the reductions are gentle, and one should extend it gently with hands when touched lightly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely out of place, you must make the patient sit upright straight, and the healer should grasp firmly by the leg above the ankle; then guide the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then elevate it upwards, and gently lower the foot back down; repeat this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot. If it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot be returned so easily, lay the patient on their back on the ground, and firmly insert a staff between their thighs to prevent movement of the patient while extending; then grasp the heel with other hands or ropes that keep the neck of the foot in place; then extend each support equally, and let the staff remain between the thighcuisses du malade pour retenir le malade quand on l’estend; then place the mires equal to its dislocation at their hands, and another healer grasps the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 When it reaches the point, put on the poultice and plug up with wool, firmly wrap the leg with linen cloth, and watch for nerves behind the ankle that the bandage is not too tight; then let it be for two or three days, and when the bandage softens, remove the splint; then leave off on the fourth day or the quarter day, and prevent the patient from walking for four more days; and if they go beyond this time frame, there are no guarantees that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	;
des dois	Of dislocations
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When joints are dislocated, if they require significant extension without much effort, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any joint of the lower back or leg, it is necessary to have the patient sit up on a plain bed or table, and place their foot under these joints, then press firmly on the foot until movement occurs; and when they are aligned properly, with no issues, place a two-inch thick board under the sole of the foot, then splint it again, leaving it for three days before removing.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When injury comes with dislocation and you see it to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not presume in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it long, nor compassionate and merciful, or late; do not dare at first, use soothing remedies for abscesses hot, and leave the sick person's hand to God if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, place the limb back in its place now, as soon as the abscesses become cooler; and once the limb is placed correctly, apply soothing remedebones desiccated, and treat the wound as it should be, with dried ointments; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced or broken, do what we have said for simple illnesses; and avoid descending into fearful ways according to what I have said, because it brings consequences from your Creator, and for the preservation of your armor and body.
Amen	 Amen
