O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science and together with its fulfillment and at its end through its exposition and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and employed everywhere entirely, it has been completely forgotten except for small descriptions found in ancient books where hands have moved them.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus comes the mistake and arrogance, with minds closed and wisdom forsaken.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I must revive it fully according to the treatment of exposure and diagnosis, as well as abbreviation; and come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and other remedies of work along with adjustment of preparation if necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	by and ou bonte;sso ça que t1: s.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that the one without a bandage is much worse, and with the hand is little; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we tell you that those who do not heed the things previously mentioned should be wary lest they err and kill people; therefore I have often seen many of those who involve themselves in this knowledge abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a madman who cut an abscess of scrofulous glands or neck in a woman and cut her arteries therein, so much blood issued out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And see one other healer who treats a stone from a man of ease, and the stone was large; it took with him a part of the bladder, and the man died inside three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to extract it, and see the position of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one were to cut into it, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see one other healer who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant physician moved the fracture onto the wound as close as possible without touching it with a scalpel, and left it in this state; and commanded that he should not remove it. And so it remained until the leg fully healed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and have been hurried to come unfasten the leg; and when I see it dislocated, then he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in any case the corruption was already confirmed or the limb, and it could not be healed; and the decay continued to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And behold a different physician who collapsed an abscess that became inflamed due to the illness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	the et; (c.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, esteemed son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, in places where there is danger and various methods; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 You must be vigilant so that the madman cannot speak ill of you; take up your tools calmly and firmly, and use the best course to come to salvation through God's grace and be praised; leave behind diseases with severe health; remove doubt by taking off these weapons.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take care of a bad illness that you might be called a madman.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire and medicinal cauldrons of ague, and it's ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of humors, and iron implements for caustication, and all that is necessary in operation.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	s, and:
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is on restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it provides instructions down to the fingers, and shapes of splints.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the nature and harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the nature of aid and harm is characterized by lengthy words, subtle science, and secret wisdom; and on this topic, many wise ones speak and agree with it; but they lack my few words, for I return to its essence.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps in all conditions where there is matter; for two kinds of conditions: namely hot condition with material, and dry condition without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In both hot and dry conditions together with matter, some advise that fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others say the opposite: that fire cautery does not help diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated for hot diseases caused by heat or dryness, and those who say otherwise claim that fire provides great help in treating hot and dry diseases affecting the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the man and his moisture to its nature by fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it never once through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	and they can's:0 by  Jum; s: they do:.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all healers gathered and agreed on the use of fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my son, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and has greater kindness than burning medicinal caustic.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Ou li desmedical knowledge, then cure the cautery of medicine is fire and les poinz comme maint, soigne est caust estreation de healment at cauter it cile: they are medicines et que ne est. Est oint. And treatment by they s in themes, for paints you dose, as cure it medical treament of fire, the lese medicine, then c.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Ardent medicines move from one body part to another by alignment, and bring severe illnesses; sometimes it kills the patient due to its potency and generosity of its composition unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experimentation and by the long service and study that I have put into this art, and it pertains to the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from being lengthy with my words, as I do not wish only to take from you the secret which is revealed or written here, and the quality of work, how it counteracts the diseases of the body, as the philosopher has said in demonstrating; therefore receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when to perform cauterizations, they seek advice from learned men.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all cases, because the harm occurrheness occurs without the aid of the cautery; and especially if the cautery is for urgent painful pains that cannot be borne until a greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	so qu’es:t the li est not c they ne lier de crowe pudres that and snoit ondle them:
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it may be that the disease occurs at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and are present in him excesses acquired through consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are applied where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and other things, so that no more pain returns; but this happens seldom.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are after medicine, their understanding is false, and cauterizations are the last of medicine because when we administer treatment methods for any illness and they fail, then we apply our cauterization, which works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is well understood that cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of some people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauterizations using an instrument of gold are more effective than those made from iron, and they did not consider copper to be equivalent due to the quality of gold and the superiority of its substance; they stated that the wound caused by cautery does not cause pus, but it is indeed true as I have tested it myself, finding that it is true in some men; gold cauterization is more effective than iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And even when you heat the gold instrument, it does not retain its warmth due to the color of gold, and cools down quickly; if overheated, it turns red-hot; thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery because we have found its application to our work useful.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from head to toe, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil caustic
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the brain; those which are done due to a disease called "soda," and by many humors descending to the head, ears, causing numerous dreams and pain of teethache and throatache, especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	the f
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit with their legs crossed between your hands, and place their hands on a support; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; where it comes to your thumbs, press until it bleeds and then heat the cautery called "olivare," which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the leu with ink, and draw while gently stretching your hand little by little; then lightly lift your hand, and mark where you see a small bone hole; if you do not see it, continue cauterizing until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take some wax, and place soft cotton inside it, and put it on the leu; leave for three days; afterwards cover with burred cloth; let heal until osteogenesis occurs; afterward treat the wound with anointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if said by ancients that the more open wounds linger, the better they purify themselves; and thus it helps with healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must thoroughly clean the fire cautery if a part of the bone is burnt, and then repair what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that one must thoroughly clean the fire cautery, and press it as hard as a woman's belt buckle to expand the bone wide enough for the humors to be released from; and one should leave the open wound long-lasting; afterwards one should cleanse and bind.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	by the:
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the pain at the nape of the neck to severe headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there is chronic pain throughout the head that lasts for a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie", as well as emesis of head and oils and plasters; if one performs the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be aware that the patient's head is of a strong nature and not too cold; then one should perform cautery below the previously mentioned cautery, just as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	the.
dou cautere dou chief	For both fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the entire body, and the skull is purged with cleansing medicines, and other remedies have been applied as previously mentioned for various diseases, but none work: then one must perform cauterization according to two methods - using a cold medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization using cold medicine involves selecting a piece of alum, removing the coating and peeling off two small pieces from its surface; then you place it on the temple where the pain occurs so that you can reapply the alum under the skin; once placed, make sure to keep and secure it well for twelve hours. Then release it and treat the wound with oil, leaving the sore as such for three or four days; afterwards, apply cotton balls dipped in butter until pus is formed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healthy; and if you see, apply some of the burning medicines that I have written or mentioned in treatise dealing with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The caulteries of iron are done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the iron cautery with which there is the shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. protrusion at the top and inside there appears a small hole; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron a bit until half of the hair that covers the skin turns red; then remove your hand so the artery does not burn further behind, and let out abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton soaked in oil to the wound, and placing it over the area for three days; then I put cotton mixed with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', at the tip only, and avoid covering the artery in this area as it is not an old injury.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating a migraine as we have previously described in divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and observe that the previously used medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the 'cultellare' caustic until it becomes white; and place your hand on the sore area for half an hour long, gently lifting so as not to cover the artery or reach the bone. Be cautious of the jawbone moving when chewing, and that the nerves do not deviate towards pain and spasms occur in a patient; be wary of bleeding from the artery once it is covered, which can cause great fear if suddenly cut off without being noticed or tested. Leave the organ halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been covered, and show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness and the patient suffers greatly, caution them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; if you see this, administer the cauterization we have mentioned or the extraction tool for arteries, with a cauterizing instrument that has two blades; these cauterizations are better than those ones and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of ears caused by coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then heat this cauterizer called "points," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pinpointing all around the affected ear, where both sides hold pain, and moving slightly above the base of the ear after finding the spot through touch; and place six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healed cleanly.
de la torture de la bouche	Regarding the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by humors, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply fire to cases resembling itching and blackheads of pores.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture which involves the vapors of insects and cleansing of the head and gargling, if it is ineffective, then you should caulk with three burns: one at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third near the corner of two lips; place the cauterizing instrument on the healthy part, causing the burn above a bit below the tip of the ear, and another along as long as a finger's length on the temple. Leave the caustic until half the hair is burnt off; this is the effect of the caustic.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this type of incision we have discussed before is slightly more subtle, and the knife should be slightly larger; then treat it as I have previously explained until healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When treating apoplexy as we have said before and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should caulk with four burns: two above each of the two corners of the head, one in the middle, and one where they are called "vasicles" as we have previously explained; and thereafter place a cauterizing instrument on the mouth of the stomach. And treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	From lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to cleanse the brain; afterward, apply all over the head of the sick person an eucalyptus plaque that is written about in treatments for plasters; here is how you perform the cautery: do as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, well done; and if not, then do 3 cauldrons above the head descending to the collarbone, with two inches of space between each cauldron; treat as with others (referring to plasters), and if you see an adhesion, make a cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, place 2 other on the tips of the horns, and treat until healed as before mentioned. The cauldrons referred to are called "olivare," as I have previously explained.
de la froidor dou chief	From coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be warmed with wool as we have previously mentioned; after reassuring the patient, then apply fire caustics on the head and at each point, and one behind and three over the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; leave until the most red skin appears, then relieve your hand; after curing so that it becomes healthy again, let the caustic called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned be.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not use a strong fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have described in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, let them do gargling and chewing to purify the brain often with bone meats; afterward, they shall have their head shaved closely, and .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessels, and on each horn; and if the patient is very ill and suffering, let them receive cauteries as I have described for one who has paralysis and softening of limbs, above the spine along the back and neck, with olive oil cautery according to my instructions.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child patient, they shall receive a subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then one should apply our described fire cauldration on those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is a weakly moist corpse, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be clarified, as determined by its status in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the head of the sickly; after making .i. patch well made, as if a circle, put it in the center of the head; and let the patient be crossed and held secure from all sides; then apply the liniment, and rub with butter of old sheep; and warm up the bandage on fire quickly so that the patient can tolerate blowing air through it; after emptying the circle inside the head, leave to cool; and do this to each sickly one once a week with other good governance until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see to cauterize it by making various points on the entire caulteries.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This manner of caultery moistens the brain evenly; and then put on cotton wool soaked in butter and lamb fat.
de l’awe des eulz	For the healing of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	Firstly, address the issues with the eyes as I have described in the division; then begin by having the patient drink things that purify the mind and guard against all dampness, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to lift his head again and perform a cautery in the middle of his forehead, make two cauteries on both temples where the nerves are located together or separately; cover all veins and arteries from under the skin with the entire length of the temple; be careful about bleeding. If too much blood is seen to flow, then stop as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in extracting the artery and making an incision, as how to stop it; never do a cautery or ligature under either of the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Doubtless this refers to "douleurs" (pains) associated with the body. Perhaps a mistake in transcription, and should read "douloureux".
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears are ancient and customary, appearing near veins or close to arteries that are visible above the forehead; and it is seen as cold foul-smelling humors, then perform the caustic treatment I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter: one on the head, two each on both temples, and two behind both ears; and if more is needed, cauterize carefully just above the eyebrow with a small caustic.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Throughout the body's tears flowing into the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three doses of strong beer; next, perform a caustic treatment or oil caustic on his head, and do two "clavilis" (small hooks) cauterizations above the eyebrows, one slightly below the hairline; and take care not to injure the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use the caultery called "olivary" which is this caultery.
de coi ci est li forme:	 of which there is the shape.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the two scars as long as they are like eyelids; and do not remove your hand except when one-third of the parchment is burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	by:t;
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn into scales, and they prick the eye, which is treated with caustics in two ways: that of fire or of burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Once they have grown and are even, then the patient should be placed in bed; place a figure on their eyelids such that it is like the feather of myrtle, with the beginning sign near the hairs; then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk essence of pine under the eye, then apply the caustic as shown by this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After causticizing the affected area that you have treated little by little many times, let the skin be scorched at the spot; and signs of healing in the wound are when you see the paper retracting, and hairs standing to the height of an olive; then gently touch with your hand, and leave like this for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the scalded area is discharged; afterwards apply ointment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs appear, and the paper is softened as before; then resume the caustication at the same spot; and if the hair has fallen out, then causticize until the skin rises to its natural place, and it is even, and does not touch the oil with the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization of burning medicines commands that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make parchment in the form of a bay leaf; then take French soap and lye each one ounce, and grind them well together quickly so they do not cool off, then heat it onto the form as per the bay leaf, and put on the paper; and if the disease is only in one place, work on it once; and also both. And put cotton ball into a cup of oil; and let the patient's head be healthy again, and your two hands pressing to the medicine, and press every time that the patient feels pain from the medicine, for he feels like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, administer the appropriate medication.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the mordication is passed, raise up the skin flap, and look if the paper appears raised as though it was lifted by fire or incision; and if so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, reset once more with the medicine in place or if the medicine has not worked, until the effects are equalized and the eyes are pointed; then apply cotton soaked in butter as long as the secretions stop flowing, followed by treating the wound on top of the ointment known as "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to protect your work thoroughly with great care so that none of the medicine gets into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes thin afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, restart the medicine on that area where it was softened by the paper correctly, as you did before; then treat until healed; this is the form of the mite.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, so shall be your constraints; and let not the correct path be returned to those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	In treating a fistula by means of cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a f지stula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and if your treatment does not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	e onli isntous. If;miches tant. <breste te la t – f
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the pus and dryness; and if it is closed, operate on the opening; afterwards heat the caustic well, and hold your hand to the caustic near the painless part above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad; then put the caustic in the oil fat, causing corruption.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you approach the beginning of the fire cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, continue the fire cautery once more, and if necessary, leave it for three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until healed, and after forty days when the bone is exposed, apply corrosive medication until it is fully revealed; follow according to what your chapter suggests.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Attend at the abscess, and feel its head; afterwards put into the small wound a thin implement of which is the shape.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the quantity of half an ounce; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move in any way, until the fluid flows into its place; and it is fitting to put cotton moistened with this on the wound: if the fluid properly fills it, then there will be a marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the abscess is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, if it must administer a drain through the vein, and return the abscess to its proper place in accordance with where it truly belongs.
des crevaices en levres	For bleeding in the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there occur bursts on lips called 'hairs', especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	How you treat these bursts as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small incision-like fire caustic according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply haste in those bursts until they heal, then cleanse the wound area so that it becomes healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	; by themi;
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has been swollen and torn and become old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary to have a cautery according to the quantity of the fasters; after boiling or cutting the opening of the fistula, hold your hand until the heat comes to its end, and thereafter at rest; do this once or twice as we described in treatments, until it heals; if treated thus, it is good; but if not, you must uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	By the slight movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are weakened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but does not help, then place the head of the patient into his health; after soaking the cauterization as described in a way to put a clamp on the tooth; and in haste the cauterize inside, and hold your hand until the heat comes from the root of the tooth; after remove your hand the clamp off, then renewing it. After wax the mouth cleansed, and rinse it with water; wash it away with aromatic herbs pour out the wine.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gums are softened and held still, and the infected moisture dried out.
de la dolor des dens	Of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and the remedies of medicines are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	byble;
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cauldrons together with fire are such that you pick up a stake of iron or brass, and it is large enough so the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, upon which its shape will come shortly after, and place it under the tooth while holding your hand until the cauldrons have cooled; do this often, for the pain shall be lessened that day or the following.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then heat it strongly; and that is the procedure for the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a caustic on an eyelid that you wish, and according to what you are able; and this is the effect of the waxing.
des scrophules	Of scrofulous tumors
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofulous swellings are of cold humors and do not respond to medicine, then heat the caustic paste as follows that comes afterwards with this method, and have two openings for the fumes to escape from the cautery on the other side; apply a hot cautery once to an abscess or however often is necessary until it reaches the edge of the abscess. If the abscess is small, place the caustic according to its size, leave in such state for three days; and cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as there is heat present. Then cure the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the joint:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When moisture wins over the channels of the pharynx, especially when it comes from cold complexion; then the patient must first be purged with soluble medicines; next perform a fire cautery at the root of the throat and make sure not to reach all the way down to the throat, but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the other fire cautery is performed at the joint of the neck and the head of the spine, and it is called "clavile," as we have discussed before; treat the area accordingly until it is healed as previously described.
de la toust	Perform the treatment at the cauterization of the throat, or incisions, or if necessary, and as long as it is necessary incised (or lances) to be performed along the joints dou cervical spine; et s’il est plusors du pains ne. Et adonc et s’il sont cauterized dou chanfreux de la veuze au lieu dou painful; et li chiés, si nul que tu puet, ou se l'oeufs
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweat, and the illness is ancient, for which two cauteries should be made in the roots of the hair; and another cautery within the armpits between the mammary glands; and there is the cauterization called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see it necessary, perform fire cautery by touching the entire area called "points" as described in the disease of the ears before us up to XXX or around them.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the dislocation as previously described, apply the cautery with three times according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, as you make them in three places simultaneously.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first address the dislocation initially.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, soothe the sick person'angs on their back and sides; afterwards lift the core that is in the hollow of your left hand; and if the joints are dislocated, heat the caustic which has two points at its tip:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	Et for the incision of the neck until it pierces to the clavicle, and there would be four incisions together with the cauterization; and that is why cauterization is done with the instrument having three spikes, so that the figures of cauterization are these four instruments; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the instrument with three spikes:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time should it be approached near this one nerve because there are eight incisions;
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the instrument on the bruise with a slick, then make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for long times until it is well comforted;
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it becomes dislocated again, such events are rare; then perform cautery on the thickness above the cauldriform cautery, or many cauterizations in close succession.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is repositioned, and there may be bone fractures and the patient feels better.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach there are coldness and excessive moisture affecting its temperament, causing numerous types of catarrh to occur, and following usual remedies it brings no benefit; then it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on their back, extending their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After this, make three fire cauterizations below the cup of the foot for a quantity equal to two doves, on all veins, and two cauterizations forward from the two shinbones until the figures of the cauterizations are at three angles, with equal space between them so they do not join when moving towards putrefaction; the cauterizations should be as large that they blacken the two quarters where hair grows, and the figures of the cauterizations according to this pattern without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see a large fire cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this pattern; and if someone fears this cautery, perform it by pinching and securing above the stomach at that point based on the quantity you observe of henbane; then cauterize entirely with what is called 'the points' cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we have obtained before it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive swelling, it is taken out of its natural condition by superfluities; and patients are treated as we have described in divisions, but it does not benefit them, so they must be made fast to their bed frame; and signs for three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria where the outline of the body appears; and leave space between each cautery as wide as a thumb. The cauters should be long in shape throughout the entire body, and do not press all fingers onto one cautery at once. It is only scraped enough on the outer edge to achieve its purpose, and the patient lies straight with their feet elevated; if unable to lie down, they must recline with extended legs and relaxed arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish to do so, if you are skilled and wise in the art of cauterization, carefully ensure that you do not burn the entire body, as this would dry out the whole body; and it should not reach the joints because the skin is very delicate at those spots, and they must be observed.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it's in the soft part or tough tissue of the liver: if it's in the soft part, the patient feels pain but not too severe; and if it're in the tough tissue, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this wound treatment is required, it is necessary for the patient to be drunk with their head elevated; then position them so that the area of elevation or the abscesses are accessible, and heat the caustic which resembles a sparrow's tail.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And with the fire cautery until the core is exposed, and reaches up to the pus, until the abscess is completely removed; after the treatment according to the methods of healing until it becomes healthy again; and it does not require any harm from this used cautery except for those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and by their hands these diseases have spread at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can hardly work, but it always seems to me that he should rest.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Of the cauliflower-like swelling
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for the swelling of pleurisy, you must make cauliflower-like root cauterizations in this manner: take the longest root of aristology that you can find and dry it; then cut it to be as thick and long as your fingers are. Grease with oil and hold over fire until cauterized. Make one large cautery between the collarbone and the neck, two small ones slightly descending on the part above the beard; two between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning back a bit; one at the navel, one just above the stomach, one between the two armpits, and one each on either side of both ribs. Do not press hard with your hand but make it as open as when smelling sweet things.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And the ancients said that no man should use fire cautery resembling shaving, and they warm it and place it between the ribs until an abscess appears; and it brings great pain to him, as we have mentioned in liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, where a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
de la mice	Removing hair from the area with fire cautery can cause burning and discomfort to the patient, but it may also lead to quicker healing if done properly under professional guidance.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease known to us as 'mice' and its divisions in wounds, if there is no improvement, then there are three methods of fire cautery that all work well.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are two ways to do this: make three or four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the wound, following the shape of the caustic for the liver that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization at once, and let the patient rest on their back. Another way to perform cauterization is as follows: wet the cauterizing iron with two horns, as we showed in shoulder dislocation treatment; lift the skin that is at the site of injury, or where the bone edges come towards the left side, and make elevations from which you raise the skin according to its size, and the caustic be proportionate to the body's width.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, then use the caustic substance, and thus there will be four. If you see it, cauterize with the entire caustic agent on three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the cure when it has become swollen for long periods, this means moving as the other previously mentioned treatments.
de ydropisie	From dropsy (edema)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Caustics are not used in hydrotherapy; that is called "ascluetae" method.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have discussed in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four caustics around the armpit, and one above the stomach, and one over the liver, and one over the groin, and two behind the back near the spine, and one location on the buttocks; and let each caustic be close to the esophagus at the core.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After opening the cautery, leave it open for long periods to eliminate putrefaction, and do not abandon treatment of the patient after the cauterization; healing will accelerate, and both intentions will be fulfilled with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cautery for the belly should be a skewer as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be oval-shaped, as it is set before.
de l’enfleure des piez	From the swelling of the veins
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in someone who is epileptic and filled with yellowish sweat, you should cauterize on the back of their neck between the ring finger and pinky, then lift your hand counterclockwise with the caustic tool.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep in, so it would draw out the yellowish sweat and be done with the caustic tool accordingly: according to this shape.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	ceustroit that (tant t
de la menoison	Of a dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of an upset stomach comes from coldness and moisture, while retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are wasted away, and cannot be healed by ordinary methods; and you see a patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then perform .i. great fire cautery on the stomach as described before or stomach cauterization, around which cautery circulates; and four delicate cauteries between the hips, all connected to one delicate caustic point, and two cauteries above the buttocks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, then perform fire cautery on the fingers, and one caustic point on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large ones, because it is beneficial when there is good assistance for treatment.
de la cure des emorroydes	of treating swellings
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the tumors are deep-seated, or one or more, and they are old and filled with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in sections, but there is no effect, then perform caustic treatment: III on the spine of the back, that which is all behind towards the naval and slightly triangular, and I caustic under each shoulder blade; and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling in the face, then make a large caustic on the stomebefore as described, and another on the liver, and one at the midpoint of all with a pointed caustic; leave the caustic open for long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the limb until it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage called "theal"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you reach the cartilage called "theal," if fatigue appears as though it is a scraper, and then set fire to the caustic so that it blazes upon this cartilage; let your hand and the caustic be near the birth of the vein until blood flow; for which there is relief. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fatigue, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying healing ointments so that they become healthy; and if you set a large caustic upon the cartilage, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound improperly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening wounds, we will discuss this in detail; if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is an occurrence of fistula and it becomes old and rotten with corrupted moisture, you should examine thoroughly the entire tent, and know its full extent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After scraping the cautery which appears bald, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that entered the tent, and repeat the cauterization until the affected body part is cleaned and no longer corrupted once, or twice, or thrice, depending on the quantity of flesh needed; and beware not to burn any nerves which are therein, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula affects the bladder and intestine, beware of these wounds, and do not use heat too far from the wound, considering they are not fully perished; after treating the limb until it is healthy again, if the wound leaks, and materials have been removed for long times, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if materials have not been removed, understand that the wound is inflamed and the bone at the front has become corrupted; thus as one of these we shall say in its location.
de la maladie des reins	For the disease of the kidneps, first assess the symptoms and severity; then consult our medical knowledge for appropriate treatment. If there's an obstruction or inflammation present, proceed with caution and consider dietary changes along with specific herbal remedies to support renal function.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of cold comes with great swelling and does not resolve itself, then you must make a cautery on both sides of the veins with the pointed cautery that we have previously mentioned; if we do this in the middle, there will be three cauldrons in line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	For bladder issues.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is heavy and cold with moisture, causing the patient to hold urine, then you must make a cautery in the area behind the bladamoor starting at the base of the hairs, making one on each side; and each should be as long as our thumb. Also do a cautery towards the back, or two if needed; and use the pointed cautery according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	of the joint
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers (sperm) are corrupted with late endings; when they come, there is great pain: then it must be done as we have said of blistering around the scrotum, and two cauterizations before the spine; and the clavicle cauterization, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	byz.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these fire cauteries are not present, then make three large olive-shaped ones and place them in the same manner as all keys; and treat until they become healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	From thigh pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes from the buttocks of the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division and treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing cauterization; the manner of cauterization is in two ways: namely, together with burning medications and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Cauterization by fire is in many ways, among which one is as follows: that you perform triangular burns with cauterization on the vein of the hind leg three times according to this shape, and make good depth and large size, with space between each cauterization the width of a thumb; it should be olive-shaped. At no time is one made in the middle of the head of the hind leg, because there are four as per this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, when performing the burn of the circle as we have previously mentioned for hip joint dislocations; but make it so that the circle contains the entire hip joint and all sides are equally burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And that is the way to do in sciatica when the pain holds in the hind leg and does not reach up to the thigh or the shin.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it comes up to the thigh and leg, make the cautery where the patient indicates the pain is, with four pricks above the ankle on the left side; also apply the incision for swelling reduction, as thick as the width of a thumb; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three fingers nearing the heel, cauterize at the point where they feel the pain with points called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If it is necessary, if more are made; and if there is pain under the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery at the caustic or circular one, and give good care in all your cauteries that you do not let them burn too much so as to avoid damaging nerves and large arteries, and causing further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen others who made a cautery on the heel of the foot, and they continued until the entire leg was swollen, resulting in the same for the foot, which became pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a stomach condition which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other as per this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise say in the leg cautionary treatment, as per this method, make a rod of iron that is as large as a newborn's finger or slightly smaller. It should be placed between gaps, with an amount equivalent to two pence coin. The spaces are over two parts and also evenly spaced; it must have well-made tongues of iron in the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure it is cooled until completely red and tender to touch, then place it on the bandage of the affected hip, and turn slightly towards the ribs; cauterize once with one cautery, leaving for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, allowing the open wound to remain exposed for an extended period; after applying ointment until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery because of its appearance, and few people do it; nevertheless, it is a good cautery that one may suffer from, but where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The fiery medical cautionary instruments are such that you create an implement with gaps into which the margin of the doorway descends. It is made of straw or iron and one length long; at its summit it has two tongues, with between each the quantity equal to half a groat; and they overlap slightly and above, joining together as per this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing on the bag of the knee for the patient lying supine with their belly supported, and then place your hand above the bag of the knee; after pouring between the two circles of hot wax that has been heated in the fire one ounce, leave it there for an hour at moderate heat, and allow the patient to endure the warmth and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Because there is also mordication as with fire; and when the mordications are finished, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the knee joint, leaving it thus for three days, and apply oil until the bruise that has turned black in color heals; and leave it to rest and recover for another three days, which will be the final aid after ointment cures until it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has extended to the thigh or up to the leg, use an instrument that you've used similarly as when you did on the hand; this is the method of hot water, and I have written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal amounts of alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 If there is even the smallest hole where the tip of the spoon can fit through; transfer to another well-plated pot beneath it and add alkali and quicklime above, enough so that when you've thoroughly mixed it with your hands, leave as such until a certain amount of water drips off onto the plated pot. Then take all the liquid and pour over chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very painful and managed with various medical practices and caustics for other limbs because they require similar work as before; if to other medicines of which one cauterizes the ankle in such a way, and tissue, honey, cashew nuts, and chalk mixed with soap. All these things should be combined together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galiens relates a treatment in which a lord was healed of ankle pain and sciatica; it had much relief, and said that no other remedy was used, and that he recovered once when this cure was done, after being bathed as it is instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And it is said in this manner to grind the fresh green litargo well and mix with a little fat, and apply on the ankle, thigh, and leg where the pain occurs; then leave for three hours or as much time that the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then let him enter a bath to warm his body somewhat, and make him lie down, and the pain will depart entirely, leaving him healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery for such remedies unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat fat, it greatly helps; and the cautery must be done in a particular manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take the linen and wash it with old oil, and place it in the hollow that is between the thumb and first finger, which are called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dried goat fat, hold it over fire until it turns to charcoal, and then place it on the linen, leaving it there until it is smoldering; do this again as such, without stopping until you sense that it has reached up to the knee, and pain ceases; these methods of cautery are called 'cautery of goat fat'.
de la dolor dou dos	It causes great pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion, or from too much blood loss, or from resembling spread cold matter, of none of these matters does cautery hold value, except for those coming from an influx of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other substances, place them on their back where they feel pain, for three lines marked with dots; and in each line, five caustics or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; make the caustic as per the one called "point"; if you see it, do three or four caustics on the middle of the clavicle as follows:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow chest when they lie down, and fear; you find in the lower spinal bone at the back and above it appears as with other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and examine it, then cauterize with a caustic cautery as follows.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the fire cautery marks each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, using a cutting caustic around the spine at points two or three lines apart, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the wound until it is clean as we have said, and be careful not to perform caustic treatment in a location full of nerve tissue.
de la dolor des jointes	For the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain from joints is due to moistures that spread throughout the body, and when pain comes in the feet which people call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and remedies cannot heal it, then it is treated with caustics in this manner: make a multitude of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustics be olive-wood according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need to grasp above the face of the foot, then make caustic treatment everywhere that we call "none".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come up to the joints and other articulations, which often happens, then make caustic treatment on each knee three or four times from every part, all around the olive-colored area; and if you need more, do so, but do not keep your hand far away for longer than until the desired color is achieved.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains extend to the knee and back, treat with the fire cautery as we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the bone on two sides; and if there is no pain in the elbow, make points above each joint and hair of the hand; and if the pains extend to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you manage it well and purge moisture, he will be made whole with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	For the treatment of scurvy:
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When this custom occurs, and the bowels descend as if newborns, it is necessary that when you see them emerge from the body, they do not defecate on that day; and use things that aid digestion so that the fetus descends from the womb. Afterward, he sits on his back between your hands, and commands that you stretch his legs until the bowels are restored, and reset the dislocation at your hips, and insert a probe without the custom in the bone of the elbow, and with all signs resembling half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery which is described below:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until he is clean and his eyesight is clear.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then bind the pouls in their place; and instruct the patient to keep them from turning backwards; work well on his thighs, and put a cushion and serge under his thighs, and another under the heel that touches his hands; then apply the fire cautery over all your hand, and straighten the thumb and stretch it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach on the first try, repeat this as many times as necessary to reach the be
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is proper that the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size, and also large for adults corresponding with their measure; after three days, heal them above the burn with butter until the scalding is overscaled; afterwards, apply other salves until they are healthy again, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well sewn up; it should also be ensured that their sutures remain long enough that the bulrushes do not protrude when he begins to walk.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should dress a well-made bandage, and carry it for another forty days; he should have good rest, work little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, as well as loud shouting; once he has learned this lesson, he will be completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting within this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal surgery
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When stones come into other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then the first incision is made with the fire scalpel as per its quantity, leaving one-third of its length; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients mentioned that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first mark the level of the head and draw a line for the width above the stone, and another one below, and place your hand throughout the entire fire scalpel.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 However, the first incision is lighter and easier to move.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	From old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it should be cauterized with the fire scalpel known as "points", and the incision should be made according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, strength, location of twists, and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is sanctified by the first cautery, that's fine; if not, begin with another cautery on that wound, because it is customary for it to change in the member nearest to it, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is sanctified.
de meselerie	Medicinal treatment
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 Sometimes they are healed by fire for great help, and particularly the illnesses that come from the decay of moisture and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see it cauterized, taking care that the illness is in its beginning and has been treated as we have said in the division, and does not progress or linger, and if you suspect that corruption might affect the entire malady, then make four cauteries on the head: one at the back of the neck, another towards the front near the end of the hair; two behind the ears, and leave enough room for the cauterization to reach close to the bone, and until any scabs come off so that vapors from large humors can escape; and cauterize it as needed according to its appearance.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the disease is spread everywhere and clearly manifests itself, it must be treated with fire as we have said before: one cautery to anoint each of them chiefly; another cauterization where you do not see; two cauteries on the spine at the neck's column, five cauteries on the spine along the back, a large one above the navel and another nearby it, two on both shoulder blades; two on each hip bone, two over each elbow tendon, one for each joint of the hands and feet, and over the palms' hollows. Beware of veins that lie beneath them so you do not burn them, nor make any cauterization above the bones of the knuckles, or on the stomach bone, or above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you perform cauterization, the greater the help it provides, and benefits accrue; and understand that the patient does not feel pain during cauterization as healthy people do, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it should be that the cauterization is large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in methods of handling iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing them with a paste made from flour several times with honey and other remedies until they are healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it still isn't healed, then you make cauterization on the limb according to its size; and let the cauterization be slightly transversely across the edge of color; then cure it with ointments until healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At any time, a cauterization is done on the hand and foot and back when a limb is moved by a swelling nerve, and thus such an affliction of bone occurs; however, no one interferes if it is not known to be familiar with the limbs and pathways of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	In times past, there were certain individuals who could be found in various towns known as 'albaras', specializing in the treatment of wounds with their knowledge and skills.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called 'albaras' is advanced and all medical treatments are ineffective, then you should make a small incision with a cauterizing iron according to the quantity of blood flow; until healing occurs and color changes, then use flour paste and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaf juice, as well as pigeon blood and duck'cuajar de harina de haba y judías verdes con aceite rosa y hojas de planta de llantén; y jugo de carnero y sangre de ánade, una parte cada uno; y mezclado todo junto, y amarrado con un paño, y cocido al fuego hasta que esté sanado.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a sore begins to develop, and you see it as an opportunity for treatment, use the fire cautery in the shape of a circle around the entire sore area.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And all the sages say that one should make a cauterization similarly within the margin of the sore; yet I do not think it is good, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen this happen before; moreover, it would be better if they were cauterized around, with the caustic called "circular," as we have said in many of our treatises on cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die down
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When anyone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is slow to death either due to the excess caused or by the condition of the patient when they are very old (that is, too aged) and have little blood, or by time; and you see it hasten towards death: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons while holding; afterwards leave in that state.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire cautery pierced, heat the cauldron of which there is a hole:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And put your hand in the midst of that illness called 'adubelati' until the cauldron feels its core, and be such cauldrons that the patient senses behind them somewhat so that the course of the pus is directed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until it is completely healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way to name the disease is "corrodens," and it's nothing but a mass on the limb, as fire dries out logs in a similar manner.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease on site that may suffer cauterization with both fire and caustic agents, then first perform small and large cauterizations as needed based on the location or nature of the malady; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, ensuring nothing remains except for any osteitis that may have developed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it be for three days, and apply poultices with oil until the burns from fire are healed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying the ointment treatment causing warmth.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days the wound does not heal well, it is good; and if not, resume the fire treatment on that which remains unhealed from within.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this concoction has never been treated with fever-reducing medicines at the site of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is more beneficial, and I have already explained the treatment for fevers in another section: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	small pearls coming to the fingers
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Many times it happens that under the feet is a disease we call "close," which is a large swelling affecting the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 It is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery. Fire cautery is such that you heat it as a penny in the oven, and it should be good quality iron capable of piercing through all parts, with sharp edges; after heating it on the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it flows into the hole; leave it so for three days until pus begins to form. Then make a poultice of malvaceous seeds ground up and mixed with wool, place the poultice over it all night, and the nail will draw out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the place of application with soothing ointment until it is healthy again.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then if they are converted to the opposite side of their body, and it happens many times in hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply hot water cautery; here's how: take a container made of copper or iron, or an earthen spoon, place it on the wart and wrap with bandage (that is to say for warts); then put the container so that it surrounds entirely, then pour some warm water, hold your hand firmly, press backward until the edge of the container reaches the root of the nail, allowing hot water to find its way deep down to the root; allow the patient to endure a bit of sting from the hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will uproot itself completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do another afterward, until you have examined all those on the body; then treat with ointments that contain warmth.
li cure dou trembler	by tin la ouest anyt lesse s’enlde;
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shivers from coldness of nerves, or fever quarterly or other, it is proper to make them .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of their back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery at the base, and one above the stomach at the olive oil cautery; this will cease their trembling and remove the illness's cold effects.
des pustules puans	Of purulent swellings
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Never appear visible in front of a body bathed or pus-filled lesions, which come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary when they appear that you perform a cauterization on each pimple: a subtle cautery of oak wood, the point being heated by fire, or from the root of aristolochia longa, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And never cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and it cannot cause any more growth ahead, but is relieved of excess from which it comes, and becomes clean; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great blood loss from the artery that has been cut to the wound at the periphery or during abscess incision or limb caustication, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet if this occurs to anyone, quickly place your index finger over the vein wound, and strain very much until the blood is calmed from beneath your finger; then apply with fire olivary caustics of various small and large sizes as long as they are all red; then take .i., or a great or small one depending on the size and location where the artery was cut, and place the caustic over that vein or where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing so until the blood is stanched; and be cautious not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; know that when the bleeding ceases from the artery, one cannot properly stanch it by themselves if the artery is large, unless through one of the four methods we have mentioned: or with a cautery, or with extraction if not previously treated, or with strong binding with thread, or with medicines applied that can stanch blood; and do so at the same time.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer proper stanching by wrapping tightly with cloths or applying burning substances above, or other similar things; if it does not help much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this happens to anyone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then they must put their index finger under the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it well until it is resting on the wound and over the vein; do not move it, but moisten with cold water often so that it may be very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and rests; then make incisions there before using cauterization and medicines as needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses that require fire-cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, and causes (diagnosis), and estrangements (discharges) and the shapes of cauterizations; I included those up to the joints there, and will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that you can find it easier as intended.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	In starting this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is greater risk and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore more caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision upon an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and such things; where doubt and fear arise, and to some it brings death.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I caution you to not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If they come from those who are so overwhelmed by their illness that they perish easily due to the severity and magnitude of their disease, and one must have fear for these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these are those who regain their wits, and say, "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is defiant.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting for you to grant permission to those who come to you with this manner, but give greater consideration to your honor than your desire, and do not act rashly, but wisely in that which you are certain of and have learned about; use prognostication and indication in the treatments of your patients so that health may be restored; and this will aid you in acheing good renown, glory, and memory for posterity.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	And I have ordered this treatise by sections as I spoke of the section on cauteries that I instructed from head to toe, so that you may find it more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at the top
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the womb tightly grips the child's head; and there has never been a case where it was resolved without knowing why.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness in adults, and it seems that all those I have observed die quickly; therefore, I believe it is better to focus the treatment on these particular remedies.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	the c s; and: CaI bon les  the n't bones text le con lasdilibe ;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see at the junctions above each part are clear, and the pain intensifies when pressed from within with your hand, and it has not been resolved: then make three incisions as follows within the head.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, remove all pus.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After straining the tears of cloth and powders, add wine and oil, and leave so until the fifth day; then remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be supported evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a bit of moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to examine where the swelling of the abscess lies and its surrounding water; for it never lies before, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, cut where the abscess swells and there is water accumulation, following as much as you are able to do so; but be careful not to injure the artery; ensure blood flow without causing excessive bleeding or evacuation of pus in the patient's condition.
de reume	Restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarra" occurs in the eyes or legs and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is the fire cautery where you cut two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you examine the eyes, have the patient move their head backward; then rub the area around with an abrasive cloth until arteries are visible, then extract a thread from their neck using all of the cloth; then check if the veins are swoln near each ear and if they recede slightly; then tie up the eyelashes with fine thread, then cover one eye at a time completely for two hours until the throat feels painfully tight.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the strip underneath the artery and cut above it as two parallel lines across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, blood flows continuously upwards from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the arrow does not open upon feeling, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space for three fingers, then bind and push up to the bone; whatsoever amount of blood needs to be drawn outside is VI pinches, and possibly a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if it does not move over the bone without sharp pain, and the abscess dressing comes into contact, then strain the wound and close it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migraine comes early with acute catarrh, due to moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old headaches and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not benefit, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have written.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of their extraction is that the patient grows hair on his temples and hears an open artery in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsing, and is not fully closed as in some men who are too cold; and if it is reopened, the patient strains a piece of cloth with it, then rubs their bald spot with rough fabric, and warms the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly visible. Then take the spatulamine whose form is as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly scrape the skin as you find the artery, then tie it at two turns, and thoroughly bind with bandages that are off from each part; and if the artery is fine, if it twists towards the tip of the needle, then dress that area according to the quantity of II fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not properly set, then he will always have pain throughout all of it.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And tie the blood of five veins until three; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two strong strands of silk thread so that decay does not occur at the wound's suturing, and bleeding continues from the vessel; then cover the excess between the two ligatures at this time, and then, if you see, cauterize with a hot iron caustic until bone is visible as long as both eyes are covered; this is the difficult operation, provided that the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization helps to finish wounds: this is why it is of greater aid for wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, treat with dry medicines that generate heat, and bandages, until it is healed; and if there is a lack from the artery as much as you work on it, hurry to apply a cauterizing poultice, or fill the area with vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the opening becomes sealed; and if you do not have this ready, place ice over the area until it freezes, and irrigate the area with cold water as long as necessary, and then squeeze as needed; and those who are more skilled in artery extraction should cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery knife on two sides, but the edge be well blunted to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when inflammation is too intense, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	by the (do-e est tre que bon'l; donce jugisle. Don't, and so that mon artoire ti; et y con le ou market; it: Stene
des larmes	From tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into veins located in the forehead's front area, and medicine provides no relief when applied there, causing the patient's face to redden as if with fear; thus, their hair becomes wet and soaked, becoming dried out and scorched by the heat of the tears, for which this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 They called the ancient "cure for bruises", and you should do this for the patient who has this condition with hair on their forehead. First, make three incisions or cuts equally according to the length of the forehead; one incision from both sides upwards down to the nose, and the other two across about two rib widths above the jawbones, being careful not to incise the arteries that are two finger widths above the jawline. Extend your hand along the continuation of the jawbone, with each cut measuring the length of three fingers between joints; prepare a sponge and plenty of cloth for draining blood, then apply the healing ointment from the described area:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the initial incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the skin that is between the two cuts across the spheno-mandibular region, then make another cut from the middle of the incision to the other end, and then extract this sterculet.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you place in the first cut an instrument called "culterellum," which is very sharp on one side and also smooth but not cutting on the other, and this is its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the splint facing towards the chest near the heart, and the underside of the ribs towards the bone, and support it as much as it reaches to the middle opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And bandage all the vessels that descend from the head to their ends until the incision is continuous up to where it opens into the heart, and then continue in the middle opening to the other end; then extract blood equally, expressing the cavity for taken blood; then put a swab of old cotton in each opening, and cover with muslin cloths soaked in wine and oil and ointment, ensuring no abscesses form; and on the third day remove the bandages, and apply a large poultice of warm water tide, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	To examine the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When cataracts commonly occur suddenly and make the pupils small and blurry, causing eye pain at the base of these conditions that often arise from multiple venues; and it is necessary to treat with such matters of poisons, which can be found in this manner.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And instruct the patient to place his forehead on it, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another with wide notches.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin the cut from the temple on the left to the right temple, and make incisions up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples when they move during eating; and once the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, then dress between the two lips of the cut with cotton wool, and try linen; then cover it with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses; when it's ossified, one must rub the bone until hair starts to grow there, then care for exudative things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wool fat, and mix them to create an ointment; apply it to the wounds to encourage healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ear is one of four things: grains or beast matter, stones from mines or similar substances as iron; seeds like peas and lentils, or fluids flowing like water easily and such matters.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it is a stone in the ear or other matter not close to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then distill a small amount of violet oil or essential oil from yarrow, and proceed with extraction; and it causes sneezing as a condition, so plug the nostrils when sneezes occur, and place cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and elevate the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often healing occurs by this treatment; and if it does not come forth, then proceed with extraction using delicate tweezeback, which is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with forceps, that's good; if not, then perform an extraction using a delicate single-hooked instrument; and if it doesn't come out this way, make a wax plug of the hole or open the ear canal well, and ensure that what is around the plug is softened so that nothing can enter with the plug; then bring it forth in this form, as often relief comes thus as we have said; and if not somewhat like that, one takes beeswax from which birds take their nests, and places a small pointed instrument of some sort for such purpose, and puts some cotton around; then press the wax on the injury or whatever it is, and bring forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out from all of these things that we have said, quickly pierce the abscess so that pus may flow and spasm occurs; then the manner of piercing is such that you first treat the patient's headache with a cephalic method, and draw out blood according to its potency, then seat the patient between your hands and turn his ear upward, making a small incision at the root of the ear near the fat or underlying area; make it like a crescent until you reach the bone, then treat it as best you can with your skill; and cure until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a hard stone and swells, make careful extraction; if it cannot be removed, place this subtle balm in this manner according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and perform an incision at the site of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have tried many times; then extract with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that extraction may be facilitated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore if the grain gets into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to cough up phlegm first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let them rest on that same ear where the discharge is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it falls out by itself, this is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not, then take many small and light weights according to the length of your thread and scorch them slightly, and put the patient's fingers in warm water; and place one or two pebbles on each side from his ears, and let them fall off from another stone placed above where the grain is. Continue removing stones until all discharge has come out forcefully, so they will fall out completely; and if you see this happen, then take a bamboo stick, put one of its ends in the ear, and scorch the other end with fire until it turns white; then repeat with another stick until all the grain comes out, as we have said for pebbles.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of an arrowhead, if it's small like a flea and similar in nature, treat as we have said in our previous instructions for wound care; but if it's a large arrowhead that can be felt inside, prepare extraction with forceps; thus, removing what is easier to take out from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	En les incisions, en l’oreille avons. Si tu apere, que concoeur les pierres a nous desque li metre, se peignement et le tuit resi the planteur dese pence as cure; de les est la s pries estir, si coeur les oculsie, et l’oreille tu est ilz les ointes d'ou li apere enlienlite incoeur qui covent avons so.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it must be narrowed from below and widened above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And apply the more refined ointment to the ear according to the amount of suffering in the patient, then proceed immediately throughout the entire wound; do this often until all veins are healed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not obey by coming out, stuff cotton around the wound as I have mentioned in the stone; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in limb amputations, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is formed thus:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or glass narrow below and wide above for distillation; and to press the distillation through a small opening on top using a well-made glass instrument, so take a sponge and wrap cotton around it promptly, then pour in your oil or juice, along with any medicines you see fit into the canal, ensuring that the canal is filled; then insert all the cotton inside the sponge and press firmly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; the patient feels relief from within, and there are numerous beneficial distillations as when it is heated on a fire for distillation in the ear; but ensure that it is not too cold because otherwise, the medicines will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	And for the eaves by applying warmth from an ear and pouring thereof with oil or other liquids into the ear, and the beneficial properties they are found in the distillations; and then let it become so that li quidem.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some form of ear canal or ears; and the same thing happens in men by an outpouching from a wound, or debris entering inside the ear, and these outpouchings come only through the front part of the ear, if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is no way to look at them clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore if it comes out from the front and cannot be seen, it requires different healing methods in various cases, and where you can see that you must put the affected ear to sunlight; then examine inside: if you see an inflamed appearance, do this work on all of this area:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And use both a sharp and scraping tool before and behind all the way, so that it does not bleed from the ear; if the inflammation is due to debris or the body of the ear, then take your delicate pincers, and carefully scrape until all the debrebri has been removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if there are obstructions in the ear, take a fine and gentle razor and warm it by fire, then place it on the edge of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If the patient feels pressure causing ear ringing, puncture lightly, and ensure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a dressing in the ear according to the size of the perforation, and apply an unguent with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do anything for any day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and cover it with moistened wool in rose water, and powder with vitriol; and if you see an effervescence of the ear, make sure to remove the tent and replace with another moistened tent covered in cerote made from red oil and beeswax until the inflammation subsides; then care for it until it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cover with cold water towel, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that are used for treating blood by distillation.
de la char des papieres	From the papers of Char
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This herbal remedy that comes from paper when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezeback, then wrap the root of a spatulamine in its stalk; afterwards put it on lye broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	Then apply them with a lepierre the cide que est les, and se nains moulde vrai unguet et pardre cotes; soient l’oil:
de la gresle	From scurvy
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often the hairs are afflicted with things that appear like frost in shape and hardness, and thus this illness is called "grandine," involving a large amount of moisture above and below the paper; the treatments include: watching if the grandine moves on one side or another, which is a light matter to know. Widen it accordingly, then gently scrape each part, then grasp with tweezeburns, and remove.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot move it without slightly piercing the paper, nothing will harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, stitch it together until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force anything, for the ointments will soon mend and soften it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	are:
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinarch is grease that occurs in children's eyes from papers and parchment, affecting them greatly but not others; it leads to morning crustiness and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears hasten down their eyelids; therefore, they lie on their faces until sleep comes, with moistened eye papillae that swell and appear covered by exinarch oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press on the place with your hands and feel the exiting between bones.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of treatment is that the patient puts their head in warm water; then take a linen cloth and make a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach present on each part, place it over them; press with your thumbs from one side and another, so that the exinachi are gathered within the circle. Then pierce the moist area at the edge with a sharp spatula, making an incision no larger than the cut made to drain blood vessels; then make incisions along it until you reach the exinach; from various dispositions, exinach emerge from the incision, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull the entire piece of patched cloth between your fingers and thumb toward the dislocation, turning your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; keep ensuring that you do not push into the gap too far, until all the torn tissue has been reached, without grasping it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the nerve does not protrude at the beginning of the gap, gently widen the gap slightly until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten rags with water and vinegar, place them on the area, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if it is for men who grind salt and apply it to spoil that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment should be continued until healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes to a hot abscess at the place, then treat with plasters soothing until healed.
des poilz des papieres	From the hairs of parchment papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs arise on parchment papers other than their nature, and are aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about diseases like tearing of the eyes and softening of the paper with mildew, until it causes destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in four ways: by fire caustery or medicine for ague as per its type or chapter on caustery, and done either by incision and suturing or by drenches, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the sick man in your hand, then turn the paper with its oil towards your left; if it's reversed, it's good; if not, then pierce every thread with a needle on top; and do this near the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull one thread across all the paper until reaching from the great edge to the small; then remove a thread, and place underneath the paper a little tent made of cotton and linen, then press down on the paper with an outline as like a bellows as possible, and always ensure that the shape is according to the quantity you see rising in the paper that extends across all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if it is for those who need much paper according to how the paper has been softened; then cover all the area that you have marked with plasters until healed; and begin from the large margin down to small; and be there a fissure near natural hair roots in the swelling of a root, then insert the needle into one of two angles gently, then scrape it clean; then sew the two edges together with a single thread of fine linen, drain blood, and trim excess threads over both eyebrows as needed. If not, do not treat it; let the stitches and threads be until three or four days have passed; then care for the wound without using drying and constricting substances because the paper rejuvenates with the healing of the wound and its binding, but the sutures are unreliable (as old sources claim), and it is a procedure without fear. And here's another method: just treat the paper as if it were a mister willow leaf, like we have discussed, using three needles at intervals according to this shape:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply the force.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the tongs and it is not even, take a needle with thread of equal thickness, and wrap one end around the figure; then wind another thread close to the large bone, and a third near the small one, joining the two threads equally together; then lift your hand evenly, and remove all flesh over where you have sutured it as we have described, then stitch both edges of the wound together, and treat until healthy; if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe with cerote and other calming ointment; and sometimes it happens that hair on the paper is changed: in such cases you must follow what we have said about the incision; but sutures on both sides are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of this condition is as follows: and you convert the parchments and fold them inside according to what I have said, then make .ij. sutures by art, and .ij. threads thin like the width of the strips are; and hold the .ij. edges or parts where you keep the threads; then join the one and the other subtly above that of the oil on the parchment, and pull the .ij. sutures of the .ij. sides properly; and leave them so many days, and the skin which is pulled will die and shrink and heal, until it shrivels completely.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed and the sore has strengthened, then treat until it heals; and if the wound is swollen up and the paper is raised, so that no hair can grow there; and this is the form of two sticks that you will make according to this figure, and in this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	For the operations are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one thin silk thread to it; then join the heads and weave them together subtly, with the length of the threads being the width of a palm; then arrange in sequence another very fine silk thread quickly, and twist both ends of this thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and position close to the sun so that the operations are clearly visible, for these are subtle and minute operations, then insert the needle through all the length into the root of the hair near it, and pierce quickly until you have passed over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the thickness, inserting in there any one or two or three or more hairs; then extract your hand so that the hairs run smoothly along the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the thread is woven and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread apart at the bottom of all the threads that you have arranged, until the thread shows through; and then pull the thread and clip off and leave two or three days or four, until the hair becomes hard in its place and grows a tuft on top; and if the hairs are long, accompany one natural whisker, and lift it up as high as it is grown and lifted.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the decay of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease known as 'aleacrati' or the swelling comes to the eye, it occurs in two ways: natural and unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens from a sudden wound, cutting, or fire cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the manner of treatment is to split that incision, and peel back the lips of it, and put lin thread inside, and wait until it heals; and nothing but treatments with things that dry up and constrict should be used for this condition.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but work with things softening like fenugreek; and rose of water or boiled linseed and oil infusions, apply as a poultice, and treat with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not at all follow its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely remedies for this illness, so that it may not return in its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the gall that comes into the bile
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and splits and cauterization and similar things; and the way of treatment is that you take a needle with which it has double thread, insert the point into the hole in the shoe, pierce to the left side as far as the right so that both threads come out through the eyelets of the shoe; then extend the sole upwards over the entire needle, and cover it with a wide spatulam.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the crack, then turn the paper, creating two cracks or grooves within the paper; and let both heads be at the angles of the incision you made, so that when they are joined together, the shape is like that of a letter with an "I" crossbar; then remove that bar, according to how much its sides have grown out from either side, as affects the paper, then bring together the two separated parts and tie them off with a thread; then treat it as we have mentioned before regarding mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or stitching or cauterization, then you must create a clean fissure away from the hairs of the paper, and as previously mentioned; then place between two leaves of bandage as I have said; and make the treatment according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters devise devices with all possible means how to return the figure to its natural shape; and for the sickly people likewise, according to what is required for treatment and applications in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And for patients accordingly as needed for the treatment and applications of different positions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs in the hands so that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must place the tip of a razor underneath the paper, lift it upwards; and make cuts with tweezamoins until you scrape off what is hard at the suture, which should not be too rough nor too sharp so that the patient does not suffer from excessive tightening or softening of the egg; your incision should gently remove the joined area, allowing it to reform naturally according to its original shape; and thus healed without any touch of dirty water, instead use clean water with collagen. Then place a linen bandage between the paper and the egg, and lay wool over the egg generously in boiled form until after three days when using soft collagen and similar things until fully recovered.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the egg
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The first step of the nail and the oinse is on le bisele pain ou il ne se cuit li aie de oile, qui seme; et poignez les .i que se estomes eles cuidessiez la veue panier les paorne.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of making the incision is such that the patient places their head in a bowl, then works on the eyes; place paper in your hand, then cut with small scissors, and stretch above. Then take a needle, insert hair from a horse or pig or cow, and a strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce into the nail fold, and push through the entire needle, tie the nail with thread and pull it upwards, scrape all hair down to the edge of the nail where the root is swollen and as far as the skin on top; cut off any remaining part at the base of a small lump subtly and gently.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure that the incision does not touch or tear the skin and pierce the nail bed, and after the incision, apply a little oil of boiled wool fat and litargirio on it, leaving it until the next day; then treat as necessary until healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	Et que li chet il ties ne iuie; car.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently lift the nail and if you see that it does not diminish or irritate in any way afterwards, extract from your mouth into an oil collyrium made of litargire and with red wax, soak until the next day; then resume the other work using this same method, until it is completely free of bone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing in the oil is against you as an abscess appears, then apply it, and first treat the hot abscess until it heals, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh on the edge bothers in the oil greatly, soak it with a string and not completely but without cutting off all tissue, that no scars may form; then extract into an oil collyrium made of red wax which is composed of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the cross placed over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Some people are born with char redness, covering the cheeks and restrained around the temples, turning to dew; it appears as a rose of balaustion; the treatments thus involve having the patient place their head in warm water, then working on the hairs, wrapping them all so they adhere properly, and supporting with force as needed; next cut the first one, shave off completely until finished, ensuring not to irritate during treatment; make an incision similar to that of trimming nails or small forces used for removing a beard, as shown in this chapter's demonstration on nail cutting and minor force removal methods; after the incision is complete and all hair removed, apply oil mixed with red pigment, or distill it through a sieve, adding crushed unicorn horn if to ensure sterility; if there remains anything, treat the warm abscess, leave it alone as it rises, and if suspecting fresh heat, treat the abscess with soothing agents before returning to treatment until healed.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary to follow the treatment for each weakness of natural course; and in cases of accidental work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb has been healed by the method used.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red swellings are covered over on the skin, and they impair its function and weaken the eye daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, when you first examine the eye where the swelling is located and which protrudes outward, and there are no other diseases besides the swelling; then attend to it as follows: instruct the patient to rest his head in your hand, then press those swellings along the entire orbit according to your wisdom, and make the incision twice subtly according to this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two screws placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you carefully extract the veins delicately and bleed a small amount of blood at another time, as long as you see that those venous forces are removed from the oil; and ensure that you do not cut the tips of the stapules, and perform this operation in midday before the sun, and be fervently attentive to your work so that only the venous forces are severed; and once you have done this, allow red and green pus to flow into the oil gland to corrupt what is lodged within.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot extract all of this within that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it undisturbed until the pain is eased and certainty of inflammation has decreased; then resume as follows until healed; and here is the method:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Those named "arissati" are fistulas: when you treat them with cautery and medicinal hot ague as I have previously mentioned, if they are not healed, then proceed to cut into the abscess where it should die off, and drain all moisture within until bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and darkness, then take all instruments of which there are forms; they are called "sharp point," made of iron with a .i. chief reent, and sharpened like a file in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	the ou n. Do soze. They are the d  t
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the bone is closed and has charred, and the body of the bow remains closed, and thus it stays like this for 40 days without renewing or developing abscesses, and such complications do not occur because it is sound; if so, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula to the nostril according to this method: and that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with aggravating medicines, and when it is uncovered take an auger as in this manner, and let the iron auger have three angles, and let the shaft be narrowed down to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn all around until it penetrates the bone and causes pain to the patient because if you hold your hand against their nose, after which restore the joint with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the pus forms and hardens on the bones, go towards the nose; this is an easier thing for the sick person.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the vein
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is pierced through entirely and there is no disturbance to the nerves or reduction, it is necessary that you bandage the patient; then cleanse them, then apply compresses without causing harm by suctioning, then put on oil with a ligature made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla; then stretch the oil, and place gauze pads over it. The manner in which you wrap the gauzes is to take gauzes soft enough, doubling each one into four layers, and then put one on top of another according to the amount needed by the bone; then strain above a hard bandage form, and start again with compresses for suctioning without causing harm; then remove the compresses and leave the oil stretched day and night, and if the ligature softens greatly, it is necessary to change it completely; then remove the ligament after a day and night, and if you see the oil returning, that's good; otherwise, resume using gauzes, ligaments, compresses, and suctioning until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The rupture of tissue seen
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When dislocation occurs in the exposed and opened joint, resembling a grain of resin, it is difficult to see; then you must cover the area so that its appearance seems normal. Then insert one needle at the root of the affected part down to where there was an incision above, then insert another neednail or if it has two filaments from the part up to the lower rim; and pierce a hole, leaving the first neednail according to its position; then cover that spot with a double thread and tie a section of the vein around it tightly, then remove the nail and place a moistened linen in abundance over it. Leave until the threads are pulled out by the vein, then treat the wound with comforting remedies as long as the injury is healed; and never let the wound be restrained by the vein from any part of a circle of cloth, until fully healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the veins give a significant appearance, pierce through the delicate superficial tissue coming from the wound, and drain the white moisture and descend the vessels in there, entering immediately; then remove them all until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	And if the vessel to be removed completely.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called «alcunnati» is not just water collected in the eye, appearing like descending rain, and it is not indeed water; the appearance of this treatment is such that you make the sick person sit on a properly arranged seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and let them move as long as you see the bow coming to the upper part of your fingers; then fix it, so that the light becomes unobstructcued, and watch the patient's expressions as they usually would; if it does not come down, understand that it is water, and if the arrangement of the bows is not done as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient must sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and gently press on the cornified skin through the tissue, slightly by continuing with the cornified tissue and the crown, as long as the bow has formed; and when it is released, distill in the oil of hot honeyed water or boiled water mixed with honey, then be treated until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Of waters in the ear
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the appearance of waters in their separation, and what is necessary to be cut out; if done according to health condition.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands in dim light away from sunlight, and thoroughly tighten the oil bandage; then apply the cotton soaked with oil to his left hand if it's on the right, or to his right hand if it's on the left; then take in your right hand (if the patient has their elbow on the left), an instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand (if the patient has their elbow on the right); then position the tip of the instrument near the crown by gently stretching a ray into that corner of oil at the slightly lower edge, and insert the almagabra instrument carefully, and turn your hand until it pierces through to the other side of the cotton, feeling when the almagda is empty; and it must be ensured that the depth of the almagda pathway matches the full extent of space from the prunele up to the end of the noirour; this is the crown's oil. When you see the bone through that clarity of cornified tissue, then position the instrument there or where it is wet with oil and press gently on either side afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water now flows out, see the patient before you and the instrument in its place.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting briefly, and if the water rises through the second channel, place the plug with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise further, gently twist out a bit at a time using your hand; then add some soot gem limewater inside the channel.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert a stopper or linen soaked in oil rosary and abundant with egg white, and seal it with the clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 And those of our time, place on a small compress generously with egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as some people have very hard nails, you must use an instrument called "albert," of which this is the shape.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And so we pierce the conjunctiva only slightly, not too deeply but making it subtle, then apply egg white as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare an agreeable bed for the patient to lie on their back in a dimly lit room; advise them to be still from all movements, provide light foods easily digestible, do not move their head or arms, keep them immobilized according to their condition until three days have passed; then discharge them into the same darkened house and inspect their eyes, let them see various things, and then reattach the ligature for seven more days; it is necessary that you perform this at a time other than during the treatment or immediately after incision because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess bursts forth, on the seventh day, drain the pus and apply soothing ointment; once it is calmed, remove the dressing from its face and wrap with a cloth for several days, remaining in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then the swelling gradually decreases and resolves into its cases; know that no apprentices should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one day among us who was from Yrach said that we were making an alchemical perception in which water flows, but I have never seen any such thing in our land nor read of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps this is a novelty.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are resembles of forms of alchemy because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are essentially rain.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of these has three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot onto the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 At no time do various types of abscesses arise or become swollen like scorpions with stinging tails; and if there are such ones that have flesh colored heads, and they have yellowish-colored marrow.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In the case of those abscesses that are yellowish and not filled with flesh, it is proper to make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; clean their nostrils, and pour oil on those swellings, then press them out with a furrowed stick on one side until you know that all of the bone has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If anything remains that cannot be covered, operate on it with all the subtle instruments lightly, ensuring nothing is left; and if it swells or forms an abscess, treat as necessary; and if malignant abscesses occur, promptly cauterize until they are closed off and excised completely, then pour oil, vinegar, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it is not working and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is sane; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, recognize that there is charcoal in the bone above, which prevents the swelling from coming to cut: then you must tie a bit of linen thread slightly thickened, and let our hands be between each space or less; place the patient's head through the knot at their neck as far as possible, and draw gently until it emerges into the mouth; this method is often used with children in schools, and it is an easy task for those who wish to do so; then hold the head that comes out of the neck with one hand, and the other head coming out of the mouth with the other hand, and compare each to our thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do what you know will restore the lost color, then treat the child with a thread, draw out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian unguent, and return it to its place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments dissolve all that is stuck from dye; and then apply a plunger of linen without any delay until healed, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; this is the method of the instrument used to purge the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And to the les cestement, si quoi de tout en la peignez si que li se euis le santeur nus sontes ce; et neis une gist cue vunt à un peu est lour oeirent fassaint les chiefs.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot onto the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the neck; it grows and becomes quite large to be visible by sight. Therefore, you must cut away from the beginning, completely removing any remaining tissue with surgical cautery or burning medicine. If not removed while still small, if it is hard, discolored, and has poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable ulcer that worsens when incised; however, if the ulcer is soft to the touch without discoloration and you can see that it can be fully excised, then proceed without fear of pain for the patient, and heal other dry and constricting areas.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut into pieces and removed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Believes that when a solution of continuous bleeding occurs in any of these delicate bones, it benefits little, for some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then accordingly if it happens to anyone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then close the two edges together with a stitch, and treat until they are healed; and if the edges are detached on both sides, ensure that you scrape off all parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two edges together with a stitch, bind it, and powder over blood powder from a dragon's tooth, and burn incense; and place over the powders a piece of lead or other cementing substance, leaving it so that it drips by itself, then treat with ointment until they are healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to suture it is as follows: you assemble the ends together - either with needles, as I have described in the abdomeincisions; or with thread, as I previously instructed you.
des apostemes des levres	In treating lip abscesses.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When dense abscesses occur resembling grains of pepper, some smaller and larger; then it is necessary to return the edges, cut above each one, take with forceps and cover in each part; afterwards place the leather after vitriol incision broiling until the wound is closed; and then bandage loosely, healing the leather of dryness until it becomes healthy.
de la char des gencives	From the charring of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often there is charring of the gums that the ancients called "albulus"; if it needs to be supported with forceps, and covered at its root, and let out the pussywire or blood flows; then place at the site vitriol incision broiling, and other desiccant powders; and if healing comes again after the cauterization, and often the second time, and the wounds. And these are of forms of treatment: it does not come to close by-soie;
des sordens	From soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	There are no soreness gathered at the top of the gums, between the gums and the teeth, which are unsightly and sharp; nor do the teeth ever become black or yellow with spots, as long as corruption comes to the gums, causing them to smell foul; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit with his head in your hand, and his teeth be under your holy cloth, and pull out any teeth or rough edges that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus cause darkness and greenness, and yellowness and other discolorations, as long as they are healed; and if you remove what has been the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have removed all of them; and know that teeth require various forms of remedies to be cured, according to how their work shows itself, because those barbers who are unsuccessful at extracting teeth have different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when curing the teeth of their pain that you delay with tearing as long as possible, because it must not always be done; for this is a matter so high until there is no excuse to extract them.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is suffering from strained teats, one must be certain of the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the patient feels great pain, and believes it to be an abscess or a sore tooth; so they extract the bad tooth. Nevertheless, the pain does not go away for this reason alone, until the sickness subsides, as we have already done with such cases; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary to cauterize around the tooth thoroughly, fortifying the gums on all sides. Then move the tooth back and forth slightly using delicate forceps until properly aligned, then firmly secure the tooth with forceps; ensuring the head of the patient's sick side between your knees, so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth properly and breaking it, if it does not come out easily, take any of these substances and apply them within each piece gently; then move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and filled with thread where the roots are; and if it is gently pulled out with pincers, so that it does not break when removed; and one must work skillfully around the gums in order to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And ensure that it is not broken and a part remains; returning to the patient with greater pain due to the root's evil nature.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And be aware not to do as ignorant barbers who, due to their haste and boldness, often break the cartilage without performing what we have described; instead, they bring great disease through the oozing of roots or by breaking the cartilage, as we have seen often; and when a tooth is pulled, cleanse its socket with wine or oil and seal it; if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the socket with vitriol paste; and if that doesn't work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the strumas are where teeth move first, with long points and large mats, do not double when you pull them; these are the shapes.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of large teeth such that they do not bend while pulling, and be well-crafted of iron, and have teeth to grip when pulled.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the spine
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains in place after treatment, it is necessary to put a soft cloth soaked in butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 As long as the wound is healing, use these pliers called "algèfre", which make it appear like a surgeon's beak. And within them are shaped like a file and that's its form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not pass through all these pins, it is necessary to expose the entire bone around the root and insert an instrument called "althali" (a splint), which resembles a staff:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if large and thick enough so it does not break, and the root jumps out from this, that is good; if not, use all methods available, which will bring forms as follows.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument with two tongs, the form it creates is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools in front of him for teeth, and from this instrument that looks like large pincers, the form it takes is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this is the condition that it cannot be broken, and know there are many densities; and so with other conditions which are not counted; and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument according to what their treatments and the disease show, for there are certain diseases or the old did not teach any instruments due to variety of parts and bones that do not break under a cart or from others, but seek where it is necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, which follows this form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Let them be large and well-held for grasping the bone, so it does not escape but can hold and extract; then restore to its place with appropriate medicines, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, you possess all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not naturally aligned and the shape is unattractive, especially in young women, you must know if the densities are behind the tooth and they are not on the right side, and it cannot be filed or trimmed; then scrape them. And if there is a bump with the tooth, take this instrument as shown here, which resembles a small beak, and it should be made of iron inwardly sharpened:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	Et place the coping piece by piece over time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file the coping so that its shape resembles this.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is similar to the shaping of needles; and in filing the tooth, do so piece by piece over time gently, until it no longer moves when bitten; then smooth it out completely at the end with a razor-sharp finish, and if it's too sharp causing bleeding on the tongue, file down the harshness until even, so that it neither cuts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	Whenever the tooth chips
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are loose or broken by impact or fall, and the patient cannot press down on what they chew without saliva flowing from them, cure them with medicines that restrict movement, but this does not work; instead, restrain it with a gold thread because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. The thickness of the wire should be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, depending on the space between the teeth; if you see any teeth moving towards each지, take the wire and double it up between the two healthy teeth, then place the chisel between the teeth as many as there are, until securely positioned to a stable adjacent tooth. Then continue covering back to where you started, gently but skillfully pulling the wire without movement; ensure your knot is firm at the root of the loose tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then clamp the head of the bone with pliers, and join them together, positioning between the healthy teeth so that it does not affect the tongue; then leave it as tightly closed as it can remain, and if dislocated, or the threads come loose, be restrained by another thread; if it stays in place, it will serve for its entire life, forming the shape of two healthy teeth and the appearance of just-set bones.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when teeth fall out and are placed back in their original position repeatedly as we have said; one should not be involved unless wise and patient, without ever aching like a wild boar's tooth, and placing it where there is a deficiency, straining it as previously instructed, remaining stable for long periods.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	:  And so, they should be ong-pie if the w such that heal;
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Never is this kind of jaw that comes from under the tongue or nature; where it is made as such; and by accident of a quickly healed wander; and the workings are such that you treat the mouth of the patient, keeping his head whole, lifting the tongue; then clamp the nerve ligament until the tongue is repositioned in its place, and if there is any hardness or lumps, it's from a quickly healed wound, so remove the stitches and clamp again, making sure not to overly close and damage the artery underneath; and once done, elevate the tongue with rosewater and ease drops, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient gargle each night until fully healed so that it cannot stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 If blood flow persists, apply vitriol to the affected area; if it does not stop, then use the long-tip cauterizing tool, which is effective for this purpose; then treat with other remedebut until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of a color or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch, as it is cancer; and if it is leaning towards blisters, and there is moisture, pour on the pinch oil until it's absorbed, then apply a thin spatula evenly on both sides; and if it fails in your treatment, place vitriol paste there until it's healed, then return to your procedure as long as you treat all thoroughly; then raise the flesh with rose water and soothing lotion, and further treat until healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	by sore lese ire ou d’or is a l’in such as both, that et cure it even, and your own teisso; and m both est and the e is the lier. And so and of and swell too much leu si on les de la testee is and s and then oint eau or they are treated with salt and reactions and a tu heal of to l’est et les, and if themes; and both lese est, and the cure;
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Never does a throat swelling called "godath" occur, and they are properly known as the two almonds; when treating them, as we have mentioned in the division, if not healed, take care: if it's an abscess of little sensation and hard color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for blood flow; but leave them until healed, and then you may divide them, or it might break on its own; and if they are pale in color, and the roots are fine, provide a suitable instrument to cut, but first ensure that the abscess is calmly resting and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun so that their head is under your hands, and work with the mouth opening the jaws, pressing between his hands; compress the tongue from top to all instruments as follows. And it should be made of silver or thin iron just like a knife edge:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You must press the tongue with the entire instrument and observe the abscess; if possible, take a needle and insert it into the almond, and pull upwards as much as you can; then tie off any vessels without tying anything on them, then wrap with the bandage at the instrument's shape, which appears to be like a force, but always the head is curved, from one place to another, very painful, and made of iron wire or fine silver.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one hand, and the other nameless; and when you have caught one of the almonds, then catch the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient with warm water, water and soothing substances, and if bleeding occurs during this process, continue to gardle with warm water or grated pomegranates cooked or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is closed; then treat it as long as it is healthy; and at no other time do new abscesses form in the throat except for the two almonds which you should catch thus likewise.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that was within her throat, namely a small-sense abscess; and the entire throat had been quite tightly closed, so she couldn't breathe through the blocked passage, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she remained this way for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swoln that it had been pushed through both nostrils by the two openings of the small one.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Firstly, I immobilized the one eye and then pierced it with an oncinere, after which the instrument slipped and removed a large portion of bone; next, I repeated this in the other orbit causing the mouth to open and pressed against the tongue; subsequently, I inserted the oncinere into these abscesses, partially extracted one, and only a small amount of blood was drawn out; thus, the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began drinking water followed by wine without ceasing efforts to remove this abscess for long periods; the abscess would regrow again filling up the space I had emptied until it became very large; then I deceived it and cauterized within her throat so that it no longer grew; after leaving these areas, only God could do more in them afterwards.
de l’uve	them. 7-30.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they are returned to the eye, and it is escaped and extended, so call it "perpendicular"; and if it is out of position and round, call it "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is cured as we have described in the section, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the abscess has calmed down but is subtle, then cut it out; and if it is round and gathered but not long, if it is blood-like or of fat color or black, then make an incision there.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it as described in terms of its size and length, seat the patient facing the sun and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull slightly outward, and cut a piece according to I/II strands that I said in the incision for II almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond natural limits; for if you cover too much, it harms speech and language; after incision, apply as we have said in the incision of II mandibles, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears being covered, then you must apply an instrument for the reassurance of the cover.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of this cautery is acute ague.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And it is that the patient places his head in your hands, and then presses the tongue to the instrument we have said for chapiste of cautery, and mix with fresh boiling water so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the grip of this instrument as shown here.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the head has a hair or an ulcer, apply the medicine as you would fill a spoon, and place the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; let the patient lie down with their mouth near the medicine so they can saliva and expectorate it without going into the throat and coughing. Then hold your hand firmly on all the medicine for the majority of an hour until you see that it has become clear, and the bites from the medicine are soothed; then take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument into the groove above the cotton as long as the cotton turns reddish inside the eye. Do this repeatedly until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to restart the medicine cauterization, do so; afterward, drain around the eye with a cloth stuffed in butter and cleanse what's inside of the medicine. Then rinse with cold water until healed, and continue gargling until well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is better through incision than with the cautery; if it is treated by smoldering according to this method, take calamities and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and chamomile, and avronne, and similar herbs, all together or some of them in a pot, and let it boil softly; and the pot well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot has an instrument tied according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it is of silver or copper, and either the head is poulticed in the mouth by the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is thinned; after frequent relapse, until the vein dries out, and ensure that you do not apply heat at the beginning of an abscess becoming hot, for many things can occur; and not doing so only during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, then take a thin tube and insert it into the head of the swab so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the swab of wool will not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Li mettres les eulz qui mauves en a l’est par lou pot, ou telque il fait escomenil; et lie un peceux cheveue li cuit la poinz se tu mei.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the endoscope be bent towards the head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and raise the head up high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglote, so as not to cause spasms or push the bone inward; move your hand such that the patient inserts the instrument themselves because it should be easy where things are clear. Then they pull out with all of the instrument equally, until it is firmly removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of throat constriction
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Never is medicine without movement, as I have said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when it does not help at all, then look into the patient's throat by the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see stiffness, treat it entirely with small pincers or delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that is not effective, then take a hollow reed, and put it into the patient's throat, and repeatedly perform warm compresses with the heated iron rod, as often as necessary.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if you give the patient water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take the pitcher of cold water and work on the mouth, and pour enough for swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as stiffness feels the water, let it go.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 If it does not come out as we have said, then suffocate the patient with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned for smoke inunction of the eye; do this many times, because it will soon feel better.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of fumigation involves you placing the pot where there are burning charcoals and covering it with a cloth pierced in the middle, with the head of the instrument placed inside; then pour your fumigant, and the patient places his hand over the chimney's opening, sealing his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but enters through the nostr([IN])ils. The nose will soon clear up, and if it does not come out, repeat the fumigation many times; make the patient suffer thirst, eat dirty things and salted food, do not drink any water; then you must allow him to vomit by this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat the throat is such that when it can be seen, it appears like bent tongs designed for entry into the throat; and resembles a healer's beak, with roughness similar to lime so nothing taken in cannot be spit out. Here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form of the instrument that looks like it must not be swallowed. And here is a healer, and here.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many types of abscesses, as the memory comes to us in this book from one and another, and they vary between perforation and incision; and there are two ways, one similar to each other, because it is due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is for boils which occur within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For an abscess in the head is different from that at the base, and an abscess of the shoulder blade is different from those occurring in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if to an abscess one should not pierce until it is fully formed like its kind; and to such that it must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an abscess occurs near the joints and is left to rot therein, on occasion it may be so that the tissue and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 If the abscess is near the main limb and you delay perforation until it dies, it will harm the principal limb; if it is near the foundation, then pierce as soon as possible before it dies; and only when you can ensure that the abscess has reached a stage of complete digestion, beyond where it is near the foundation, so that it does not spread outwardly, and becomes a fistula; and cannot heal in great terms.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And that one must know the abscess is fully formed according painless, and then comes on; and other times of it, and are no dose behead or ache and cen est lesions; and li. And dose ducter leu as. And also pain of de pains ou heal infection from the head. Do not is abscesses and so to les plouez pain d’pabece, et pain ou les same plee of aposteme coulue. ounteau, et est li cen de leus de perforation; li celes qui pain de les dose in a heu de thetasmei pain and dues la plie s's m, orde of pains oles se de is the same eus ouli de.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 When they swell, according to which limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in the churned flesh, you must allow the opening to remain until it is fully healed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it in front of this, the poison from within spreads throughout its body and it is filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips harden and the deepest parts become infected.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscess that you perceive according to the width of its body, as befits the limb it is in.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is fitting that you treat small abscesses with small openings, and large abscesse
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce it easily; and when the abscess is large and has great swelling, and you pierce it, do not pull out all the pus at once, but drain one part; then bandage the abscess until the next day, then avoid draining anything further; repeat this process gradually larger each time, until all the pus is gone; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the arrow can sometimes leap out with the release of the bowstring, and inadvertently kill the patient, so be cautious.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat this chapter with great caution, and when you perceive the abscess, open the wound, and examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a clean cut, stitch it with linen or old cotton; and if it's large abscesses, and there are many threads, ensure that in each you place a tent so they come together; and if you have sewn around part of the skin within the abscess, fill it with old cotton or wool from linen cloth without moisture, up to three days; then unsew it, and apply ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If bleeding occurs on your wound, treat with cold water and ease, and moist cloth, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If bleeding persists, treat properly and heal, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, apply with warm wine or oil; and if it is winter time, and the affected area or abscess is very sensitive, cover it with tents and moistened cloths soaked in wine or hot oil; and if it is summer, and the affected area is thick, cover it with moistened cloths in cold water or oil or warm vinegar until the third day as we have said, then drain the abscess and express and heal according to necessity until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is how one must generally proceed in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how to approach treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of pus-filled collections.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses arise in the scalp, they are handled as silk, similar to the follicles of a girl's hair, and there are many like this.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have fat and texture like hairs with moisture; and there are others that are hard and painful to the touch at the base, and there is no doubt if the arrow hits contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the techniques of bandaging are such that you must try with all instruments called 'entromissors', from which formations come afterwards and what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, it grows above the long one. (This could refer to a growth or formation that occurs when there is an excess of moisture.)
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 When the moisture is drained, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, as it returns as soon as you leave it alone; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, and let it remain until the next day; these will heal those who have been afflicted all night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then resume the cotton as before, on the second day and subsequent days, until you are sure it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess remains fatty, then follow this method for long: drain it and wash with vinegar, and scrape off all parts, and apply all your treatment to where it is located; and if an arrow causes opposition, do as I have instructed you previously.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat an abscess if it is pus-filled, and with scraping and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the treatment of a pus-filled abscess and its moisture is easier, for it contains less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if some of these abscesses or in the head have no moisture, and among these I found an abscess similar to a long stone: hard, sharp, and dirty; and had it been struck by anyone, they would have made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or in the head, for those that come from children's heads and ear roots, let the opening be made highest at the most dependent point to allow pus to exit; and treat them as it is due.
des scrophules	Of scrofulous tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and from under the shoulders, and in the armpits, and never come to any other place or body parts, and they are very much, and closely connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each swelling is properly dense in its place, as are the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these swellings.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that hold malicious intentions which do not wish to obey healthiness.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that case where you see a good disposition upon touching, and it is similar to the color of the body, not sensitive in any part and not inflamed on either side of the artery or vein, and not deep; then one must incise from above, peel each part, and open the two lips at the corners of the wound as we have said in abscesses of the head; and slowly but surely proceed with caution that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and ensure there is no spasm or inflammation, allowing one's hands to remain steady, and not moving too quickly so that you do not overshoot what needs to be excised.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, then put vitriol paste in the wound, or any powders that cause bleeding, and bind the wound; let it remain until the abscess is soothed and softened, and begins to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the abscess is healed, return to your work until completed; then use thy ointment and bandages if there are any small ulcers remaining, cover and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, do not cut that ulcer to its root but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang by itself without harm; then apply the wound with fine cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you completely remove the scrofula, it is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound and hold them closed now, so that there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And it is necessary for you to bind up the root and drain pus, and close as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess, puncture where it appears tender; and pierce as previously described, depending on the state, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it does not spoil what is infected from infection; and once the wound is thoroughly cleaned, use a healing balm until it is healthy.
de squinance	If you are treated by applying a tissues to ensure there's no longer remains of any dead tissue, then as we had said previously mentioned, so forth; and when the wound with substances so is that healing ointment and other until it properly cleaned becomes cured.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and talked about the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen in our land that it is made, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with strangulation, it is necessary that the fracture of the throat called "epiglote" be removed; and this cannot heal by itself because all the veins and the main source of pain are present in those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main source, it is necessary to remove the epiglote to avoid destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is therefore necessary when we wish to split the epiglottis that we split it from above three circles or four with a small cut across, between two circles or by the quantity of the cut on the side, not in the cartilage; and those locks are suitable for sectioning the epanglottis such that there is no sound, and the blades are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, then he should extend the skin of the throat to its full length, and split it up to where it joins with the trachea; squeeze out any blood vessels, provided you see nothing there, and then close the fistula as we have said; and demonstrated by the cutting of the membrane of the trachea which breaks open at the place that is ruptured, and due to loss of voice; leave the open wound closed for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed for which there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound near the cheek, and tie a bandage that tightly presses against the jawbone; then apply medicines that induce warmth until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	the uzerd: and  (or they:s.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then take the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and therefore it is commanded to leave the open wound until the sickness has passed, which takes three or four days, after which you are ordered to sew up the wound and treat it, until it is healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a maiden took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting the left side of her larynx; and I went to call for help to cure her, but found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and found that blood had come from it; however, she hadn't bitten a vein or other tissue, just her throat, and the blood flow was coming through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried to sew up the wound and treat it until healed; and it happened that the maiden recovered enough to have a red voice again, returning to her normal self; therefore I say there is no need for fear in the treatment of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and they are large abscesses with the color of jet, predominantly in women; there are two ways: natural and accidental, where the natural has no means.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental way has two types: one resembling fat-like matter and another type of abscess that comes from us like an artery; there is fear, and it does not need to be treated with fire unless it is small, and test and examine everything thoroughly: if you find it similar to fatty substance, and without attaching to any vein, wrap as one would bandage a wound, and treat the entire area until fully healed.
des nous	And let us know.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many ways to address this, all which I shall describe their resemblances; and now it is necessary for me to explain the entire difference that exists between them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and inflammation are present until the boiling over is past, and the putrefaction is complete; then rests the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With ours, there is neither fever nor pain and it contains pus, which is its own sac and corresponds to the body's color, beginning similarly to glass, and becomes larger; and they correspond to two appearances, either hard or moist, and very much in accordance with what I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the care of us that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermitted", according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the method of inquiry for abscesses in us is that you grasp or make it more moist than you find within the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly until you know that the pus has been felt by the touch, then proceed according to the size of the abscess; then extract the foreign body, and be cautious so as not to hurt.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs in a vein and it has such color as I have mentioned regarding other abscesses; and if after the incision no moisture comes, consider it fatty, treat then accordingly with cross cuts, grasping at each end and carefully scraping from all sides, ensuring the skin is healthy using a needle; and if you cannot render it clean in one piece, slice it so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If there remains nothing, it returns many times; and if some portion lingers causing slight pain, apply the wound with corrosive ague powders, press the wound, and place soothing substances over it, treating other ailments until healed; and if significant swelling occurs, cut along the edges of the wound, and treat as that which causes fever.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the pus is thick or contrary in any way, hasten and mix it with white vitriol paste, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound dries out, then let the sanguineous effervescence rest; afterwards return to sewing what was left undone.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 See the forms of entwined strands, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them there are three types called "albaret," and one type called "breb," and there are also three sizes: large, medium, and small, to search for fistula boils; they resemble the needles used in sorcery, made of citron wood or iron, or silver, with yellow ones being effective, while black ones are more suited for searching for cerebrus from a fistula; they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors come in various shapes, as you can see: large, medium, and small; if there are tumors with two types of boils each; if there are tumors with three types of boils, and they also come in three kinds; if there are tumors with two types of boils, or just one type only, and these all come in three sizes; and all these must be present at their location.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The chief of these tools are sharp, and among them there are those that cut only from one side, where the skin is scraped but not severing vein or nerve; and among the intermediaries are those reset in clamps, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of abscesses. There are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one should never use them if fully extended, such as legs, arms, hands, elbebows, and similar areas; and never is another instrument used, like incisions resembling fistulas, according to this method, through which blood is channeled.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at no time back into its proper position of veins and arteries, and does not return according to this grand form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Never do the breasts of men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they resemble female breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them should follow this method of the line: b. up to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 First scrape the fat, then dress the wound with medicated charcoal paste, next sew the two edges of the wound together, and clean it until it is healed; if the patient lies on his side, and becomes weakened by its size as happens in women, create a suture in two lengths over the wound through slight tears; so that one end holds onto the other at the ends of both, ensuring the larger encompasses the smaller according to this pattern, from this line b. up to line g.; then scrape the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and do as we have said with sutures and powders, and everything necessary for treatment until it is healed; if it is not healed or the incision is not entirely done because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until it absorbs what remains and fat, then cleanse until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses and fractures of the arms and legs
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from the limbs are hard sores or ulcers, and some that contain pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those which contain moisture must be cut following this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	an:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to hard tumors, treat them as we have described in cutting open hard tumors, and if the wound reopens, prepare the fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	For rupturing of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is ruptured and the skin over it becomes swollen, many abscesses occur there, along with bleeding wounds; when you touch this part for the artery, the abscess is acutely painful; and when you sense it on your fingers, it feels strangely strained; and when it's near a vein, it appears to be lacking strength; and it would be foolish to cut such an abscess, especially if it is over bones, joints, or in other highly sensitive areas.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary to remove the iron bandage and also those who are chiefs should be removed from it; in those with arterial swelling above the skin, work on the ankle bones, then expose the artery through the sheaths, until fully uncovered; then insert a needle underneiz, pierce the artery to the opposite side, and hold the artery using a double thread in two loops as I have shown you for extracting the two arteries that are on temples; then keep the area between the two threads of an intromittent until no blood flows from it, and separate the abscess; then prepare the bandage with cow fat until it is clean; if the abscess is near a vein, ensure you hold the entire skin as much as possible when separating the abscess; then apply medicinal ointment suitable for that area until healed; and if the abscess is on the belly of the vein, make sure to take care with all the skin using a needle, pierce it, and use a double thread which you pull from the opposite side; then close the abscess as I have told you or bind one part of two filaments at each eye; and if you doubt whether the threads are not tight enough, reinsert another needle through all the threads above the first incision, and strain the threads in four loops; then cut the excess tissue until it is separated, then cut away the excess skin but leave what is joined; then apply a layer of ground millipede mixed with wine and oil, then use bandages and ointments until healed.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses to nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they also appear on nerves when struck or from excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This occurs more often in the shoulders and elbows, as well as in all areas where there are joints, resulting in serious abscesses, with its color resembling that of the body itself, being in various painful states; and when it is forcibebly straightened, the patient feels severe pain which isn't throughout the whole body but mainly from the neck downwards; and moves well in all directions, not moving forward or backward nor upward or downward, and those who are dislocated cannot be covered with iron as they may contract; and those who have issues at the top of their head or forehead cause itching on the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, take tweezers and treat it at its root; if large, tie off with a string, scrape it, then bone up and stitch the wound closed until it heals soundly.
des grosses boces pendans	Large hanging sores
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 On no occasion does it occur in the belly and not elsewhere either; it is a disease called 'fungus' due to its resemblance, with fine roots and large stems; there are both small and very large ones; I have seen men who had two or three bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no difference, they were white, had delicate roots, were branched, and carried moisture within.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; in cutting into it, you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with fine roots; then bandage widely, and be present at the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 At topping there are often great blood discharges, and if they don't cease, then hasten to apply cauterization; and if you see the patient expectant and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made linen thread, bind it as we have said, leave for three days; then hold fast, continuously straining the linen thread until it cuts off the tissue, causing him work through it; and if the roots are large, be wary of cauterizing his abdamently to avoid the belly, but adequately cover the moist part first, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not cauterize the vein which is of a sickly color and poor sensation with milk white appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an encrusted boil, and I will come to treat this syphilis hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is forcibly closed.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of a boil comes from a wound or incision infection, and it is on the abdomen among some boils, as occurs in other regions, or blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or humidity; and if it's due to the region of syphilis and by the discharge of pus, then its color resembles that of the body, and is a mild thing without pain, easily draining through various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then there are various outcomes; and when one presses on its extremities, it recoils, then returns, and at times it may be hardened, with significant enlargement at the entrance of the bowel for intense work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to moisture, it is a mild thing and easily opens when pressed with your hand, without constraint; and if it's because of blood, the boils are large and hard, and projected according to quantity; and if it's from humidity, it is tender upon touching, and the appearances should be examined to see if they are due to artery or vein blood, or humidity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to leave the healing alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is for the intestine or the belly, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch out his alail, and they be extended straight, then wrap them entirely with a cloth; then command him to lie supine between your hands, then go around the area you have marked at all the abdominal hair, then extend three-quarters of the abscess above the great inguinal ligament; then bind it tightly using strong thread or firm silk cord, and make sure they are securely bound together; then work on the part of the abscess that is extended over the binding, insert your index finger, and push for the intestine; if you find it attached to the inguinal ligament, detach it, and put the intcuinent into place in the lower abdomen; and if you find a hernia, or vein, gently go around it, then return to your treatment area and take two needles, and tie them with strong thread, and insert the needles where you made a cross that you did earlier pierce; then pull the abscess through four holes above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the hole heal on its own; or cut away any subtle or protruding tissue, then treat accordingly as we have said; and extract blood or moisture that you find, then cure according to what is necessary, and sew up the wound as usual.
dou chancre	Of burning sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	In the division of similitudes of ulcers, and how one must work with medicines, and how to cleanse a wound caused by iron; and let us say about the ulcer in bone marrow, which requires great caution for treatment, and according to the ancients when ulcers are present or can be removed like those found within mammary glands, thighs, and other similar areas, they should all be completely eradicated at their onset; but if they become large and old, it is not adviser that one approaches them, for I have never known any cured from such; nor has anyone ever been healed in my presence before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatments for when they are present or can be removed as we have said is to purge the patient of black bile once, then if he has obvious repletion make him fast, prepare a suitable location for treatment; then pour your salves or ulcer, and hair from all sides, and bone fragments from all directions leave nothing behind; let it bleed fully, pressing well with your hand or something else, and the blood flow in reverse of the incision on an artery or vein makes you counteract such by cauterization until its vessels are sealed off; then use other remedutes until he is healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy (edema)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division about similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and signs of each kind, and the treatment done by medicines, and that which is treated with iron; they are only slightly different. And you should not touch it with iron in these two similar conditions: namely tympanites and hyposarcoma, for it is a deadly matter; therefore when you treat this dropsy-like condition called "eclites" by medicines, and the treatment does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropser, as well as other things like vomiting up solutions of the stomach: do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see a strong patient with only dropsy, who is neither too young nor too old, then work this way: lift the patient on your hands, and have an assistant press the belly pushing the water to its lowest part, then take the spatha aspergine in accordance with this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And so employ sharp instruments of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And so use sharp instruments with two parts. On the point and always do not let it go too far that it reaches the intestines when inserted; nor should you puncture them. Then examine if dropsy is caused toward the intestines: If necessary, make an incision directly above the joint III on the right side; And if it's due to a liver disease, then your incision should be on the left of the joint III; and if from pus, then on the right. It must not be that the patient lies on the puncture where excess fluids flow into his weak spot; Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, fill it, and remove the hand entirely through the entire scrotal area like when shaving a quantity equal to one nail or slightly more; then perforate the fascia until the swelling reaches its usual place, which is where the fluid resides.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is similar to a silver needle fine, and made of brass or iron lightweight, and in the part below the small hole; when touched on one side, it has three holes; and two on the other side, and one more; and the head shaped like a feather quill, and this is the shape of the incision which scribes cut the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top above is the nozzle, so that when moisture comes to the eye, it rises up to the instrument; then empty a third or half of it, for if you empty more than necessary at this time, by chance you may kill the patient due to the release of his spirit from the weapon, causing him paleness, or approaching death. However, empty according to the quantity needed, and according to what the dispositions of virtue in the patient mean, and their hair; then pull out the instrument and hold back the eye, which is now held by a curved needle that I mentioned earlier, pierce it this way; then resume the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering as such, and draw some liquid from the eye; do this every day, but be cautious not to overfill too long, just a small amount of fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 If you doubt about the patient, and you leave them much water, then treat with burial or hot sand, and through lots of sweating or bathing and sun exposure, and dye with drink; and cure with drying medicines until they are healthy again, and cauterize above the stomach and liver and spleen after removing water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of erecting the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There is never a child born with no foreskin on the penis, or if present, it is small, or not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If there must be done soon that he has pierced all the phallus very finely according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then insert the subtle plug of lead, and bind it tightly so that for three or four days or so, when he needs to make urine, untie him quickly, allowing him to urinate, then reset; but sometimes this is not necessary, as the strong urine does not keep the passage closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If it is found that his urinary tract is small, then it is indeed the medicine of a lead plug as we have said, which will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the urinary tract in its proper place are impotent, for none arise with it at the head of the penis, which is why they cannot urinate unless they elevate their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back with their head and foreskin raised up like a pen'amolet, so that the opening is completely closed if necessary; and be mindful to prevent blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, treat the wound with an iron rod causing bleeding until healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and there is an appearance of ugly lesions; they can be benign or malignant; it should be treated by gently pricking with a fine needle, cleaning and sterilizing them all, then applying cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment; afterwards treat with the finest ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and suppurating, it is necessary to treat it with fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have reached it, and if the ulcer is inwardly swollen, with part of its hair inside and another protruding outwards, you must remove the ulcer from within first; and when it has been loosened, treat the outer portion.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat it as a whole, ensure that the hair on the wart is not punctured, and blackness and decay come to its surface causing an odor; in such case, remove all that is black and corrupted, then place over it on the poultice of honey and ground wheat flour made from pomegranate bark and rue leaves, then treat with other remedangs until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If bleeding persists, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauteries aid in two assemblies: namely, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is decayed and retracted, it must be that you stuff or insert a tube made of lead into the penis and urinate on the patient; and when hairs are hardened at the tip of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, either due to injury or abscess, then indeed one should scrape it with an instrument heated up until the ligaments are detached, and all parts of the head of the penis are released; and if this is a grave matter, you must scrape off just near the tip of the penis and hairs using spatula or any soft substance; then carefully separate them into two and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water between them without it hardening immediately.
de la circoncision	For circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a disjunction in continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially for children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the most part of masters and priests who practiced circumcision before one day, in times of plenty, and at any new moon; there were keys because there are two locks, and sometimes a cap was placed on top and below it.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now it recovers partially, and the pain doubles, and the healing which is not quite sure does not secure the point of the limb; and in the trimming of the nail by chance escapes the knife, and cuts into the tissue, and many times such wounds occur that do not require further treatment and I have observed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the trimming which is done using force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the force cuts equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, make the bandage even at all points; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and it should have the manner of the first work so that you cause the child to think, if he understands, that you do not use force on him more than necessary for tying the thread around the rod only, then allow him relief in all manners possible; then keep it straight between your hands, hidden from his sight and feet, with no disturbances; then place your hand on the rod and blow or snuff, guiding it upwards until the head of the rod is erect; then cleanse thoroughly of any filth accumulated there; tie off using a double thread at one point; then secure under I inch from another knot. Then attach the leashes with two strings to the pouch and indicator, bridling between the two knots; lift gently away hurriedly, leading the head of the rod; allow blood flowing slightly as it is natural; apply powder on top and below using a glue made from a spoonful of egg yolk cooked separately with rose water mixed with good oil and fresh, leaving it until the next day, treating again as necessary until healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of strength for cleansing should be such that both eyes are equal and sharp, and the eyelids as equally large as a hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the inflammaturgy is when the core within escapes through the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it with your thimble, just as if the lungs were to form an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your thimble, then use pincers, and then cover.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for three days, and what is under the rod is swollen, leave it to be as if the abscesses are soothed, and lightly scrape; cover as you wish to move, and guard from the part of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the sudden wounds of powdered things that we have said or dealt with powders, and if it is covered too much, and it goes above, it will not harm; then treat as we have said, until it is sound.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 Retention of urine is due to stone compression, frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, as we have mentioned in the division; and if retention persists despite these conditions being addressed, observe its cause at the site near the bladder neck, where it should be supported with a leather harness; then place their feet on a board under the back while extending the abdamen towards the floor, and restrict the patient's movement as much as possible. Afterward, apply pressure to the bladder neck for stone expulsion above, resulting in urine release; if it doesn't pass, as we have discussed, causing significant pain, provide relief through extraction using a tool called 'catheter', which is: an ultra-fine, lightweight silver tube about half a palm long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method for relieving the passage of urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to a short piece of wool or cotton, then place the end of the thread inside the syringe; trim any excess yarn and insert it into the head of the syringe until full, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and almonds. Have the patient sit on a stool, and apply oily balm to their bladder and penis with moistened oil and olive oil; gently insert the syringe into the penis as far as it reaches near its root, then thread it upwards towards the scrotum; fill the syringe above until it reaches the bladcuke, so that the patient feels urine flowing down to empty itself. This is not done according to this order for the reason that the conduit you insert follows a twisted path. Then pull out all the yarn at once and collect the urine; repeat the process as long as the bladder remains emptied, ensuring the patient's comfort.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When incontinence or blood appears within the bladder, with pus accumulating there and you see to distill waters and medicines, do all that is called "clêpesdre," which is its form.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and if with III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the joint above which the medicinal poultice is such that it thoroughly softens the penis without addition, so that we can draw out the moisture, and insert when necessary; and when you see to apply your medicines in the bladder, place the head of an oakum into the moisture, and pull at the worm which is within; then you will drain the moisture with a goose quill, and then firmly reset the worm back inside; it will enter the moisture space, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of clister which we use for cleansing the bladder: such is this.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 It is of silver or copper and the head is higher; from under the neck where the ligaments break; then take a sheep bladder and put in it the moisture you intend to use for enemas, then twist two strings around forming a strong double filament, and warm that moisture over fire; then pour the head into the enema bag, and stretch your hand with all the moisture as soon as possible until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly through; then insert a strong string in these holes, then connect the circle like assembling a bowstring, and put inside what you want to use with oil, moisture, and water, and tie up this instrument; and do as if you did with the bladder, pressing until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the section about stone extraction and remedies; and I explained how to differentiate between stones formed from rainwater and all signs, and the types of stones where you must work by cutting; and with bladder, and penis; and now I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones which enter the bladder occur more often in children, and this indicates that the water from the bladebeels like to jump as a hare in its subtlety; there is much urine, it troubles the male organs, causing them pain many times, then hardens; it affects most of these jumps at their foundation; healing for children until they are four years old is easy, but severe in older individuals, and moderate for those between youth and age; treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema in order to expel all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For this prevents any time seeking for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the extremities and make them stand up straight, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladebowel, and exits once at its highest point; then have him sit between your hands properly placed, with his hands below his thighs so that the bladbow is entirely inclined downwards; then grasp it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in place, then now is the time to cut near it.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not exit upon touching everywhere, moisten your left index finger with oil, and apply to the patient's forehead or navel, depending on whether they are young or full-grown; then place in its foundation, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, move towards the neck of the bladbow; then press above your finger, and extract it further wherever you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the vein into his hand, and command him to stretch out the sinews towards his right hand above, and from his left hand remove the skin that is below the sinews in the area where cutting is done; then he inserts a spatulam orifice, which gives it its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And it is between the hips and the base, not in the middle but near the left knee; and be straight above the stone, with the thighs together or apart, and make them tight so that they are wide towards below, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; occasionally press on the leg where it meets the base, until it moves without effort; and know that there may be a piece of stone or it has corners, edges: if it is gripped tightly, then removal is easy; and if in one that sits softly, like a grain, and round, whose exiting is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 When there are angles and edges, make the body larger; and if it does not pass, then it is necessary to widen with pincers similar to a file at the tip, so as to stretch out the stone that cannot escape; or blow through an instrument delicate shaped like a crab's head at the top; and if you can't manage this way, enlarge slightly the passage, and if it remains obstructed, apply vinegar to strain it; and if there are more than one stone, first place the largest at the bladder neck, then pass through, then widen further, and afterward address the smaller ones if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, one must sear it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For there are two things that happen to the patient: they die or urine comes out again because the joint cannot be joined again; however, strive in draining (likely referring to draining pus) and debridement with forceps on the shattered pieces until you have treated the wound by pieces; and when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense, aloe, dragon's blood, and bandages, and cover it with a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and pink-colored water (rosewater) and cold water to cool the hot abscess; then rinse the patient's neck with this solution until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, wash thoroughly with oil and water; then apply the final ointments of dafinicon and basilicon until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this vein, which is known to prevent urination without a hiss with the urine; then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladwrapper, and become infected; then cleanse the wound of water and dirt and hair, and aid in all ways you know how, until healed; and it is necessary to bind all veins treated with two thighs and apply medicines above that area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it passes through the urethra, and becomes lodged inside, and urine cannot flow out; treat as I have said before, that you dilate many times with this treatment by using a tool for dilation.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have also found this to be so.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and it is pierced at four angled tips in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the wire and wrap it around the rod just below the stone; ensure that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the needle gently through the rod until it reaches the stone; rotate the needle slowly in your hand at the stone, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon urine will flow out, then press your hand where part of the stone remains inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it breaks immediately and falls out with the urine, and the patient is relieved; if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then thread another wire under the stone on both sides, make a hole in the rod at the place of the stone between two ties, then extract it forcefully, break the tie, and cleanse the frozen blood present in the wound; cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones are inserted in women and if it happens even once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and the second reason is that no woman can properly find another who knows how to undress at the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third way is that sometimes you may not find a woman well skilled in this art of healing; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman's womb is further along than the stone in the man, so it must be done with deeper incision and great fear involved. And if necessary measures seem appropriate, then one should choose a midwife who is well skilled, without hesitation, or else an especially subtle doctor; and present her with a wise woman knowledgeable about women's health, or a woman familiar with part of the art, and command that she perform what you ask from the examination for the stone; and pay close attention to ensure that the woman is a virgin. Then it must proceed by placing its foundation properly and seeking the stone; if found, restrain it beneath her pelvis, and recommend that she place her hand under the belly near the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is dislocated, make sure to gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder up to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut at the bone at the root of the thigh opposite the milky white vein, where there is apparent swelling, and feels the bone in that area; do not move its joint above or below the bone, but straighten it with force immediately. Then thrust into the belly, as long as you feel the bone can protrude freely, and know that there are many types of bones: they are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, some having veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you examine the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the stone does not come out, then use saltpeter paste and keep it for an hour until it is dislodged; then return to your work, as long as the stone is strong, and apply the soothing ointments that I have told you in the extraction of stones from the homes to help you in your work; and if the stone does not come out, and it is a vein that has been torn, then put powder on its place and strain with bandages and linens, without attempting again, let the stone remain and do not squeeze it, unless by chance the patient dies; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood is subsided and the pain diminishes, return to your work as long as the wound remains closed.
de hernie carnouse	For a carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	This swollen hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or white sap, which originates from below the skin's surface, contained within the egg; it is called "siphaca," and never properly in the egg's membrane, if one believes that to be another egg; and this is the leather between the white siphaca we have mentioned, and such occurrences do not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the creation of this hernia is due to weakness in the veins, where that matter expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And not once does it come from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has various colors: sometimes greenish like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and it happens more frequently; these are signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is as we have described, whitish facie, then the abscesses are nearby, not long-lasting like an egg's shape, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the proper fabric, then abscesses are present with part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg; when the moisture lies between the skin of the joints and the whitish facie, they feel warmth well; therefore, to know the color of the moisture, examine everything involved in its entirety, from which the shape appears as previously mentioned.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, after the interspace, judge what is within it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be nourished and have enough body strength; then they lie on their back, on something slightly raised, and covered with many cloths; then sit up on their left side, and command the assistant that he sits on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the lower end where the joints are; then take a spatula-like instrument, and cut through the skin between them down to the elbow area, making the incision straight while following along the ribs until it reaches white fatty tissue; carefully carve as much as possible according to your ability; then pierce the fat layer clean with water from all sides using a wide awl, and drain out all the fluid, then apply bandages, and pull up the fat layer; do not touch the ribs but only the fat layer. Carefully cut or in pieces as needed the ribcage of him subtly so that if you don't cut them neatly, fluid will return; and if it flows back to your work, then reset when the patient has been completed with the treatment on this part of the body; then join the two sides near the suture line, and treat as other wounds until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are dilated, carefully considering blood loss; then cut out the entire swollen area and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 If the fracture is joined in two parts together, know that these are two branches; stabilize the other part as you did with the first equally, then let out blood and apply linen soaked in rose oil to the wound; then place another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put on both ends of the fracture, and cover with doubled cloths, and tie everything together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two pieces of cloth and place them with shredded wool according to this pattern and sew together at the girdle of the breeches; one side is pinned up to the base until the back, and the other to the lower part near the elbow; the other pair on both arms, and be sure all are secured in a loop through the braier. Never use this cautery method as a place for iron tamping, but take a subtle clitorial cautery and cover the leather of the joints, then warm it as we have said before; so that the white saponin containing liquid is revealed. Then take the cautery according to this pattern, pierce the oncine sac with it, and scrape with a subtle hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 In all ways of coping that you can see, as long as you reach everything; and keep the fire from touching the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and move with care to prevent bleeding, and be mindful in wound dressing; and if anything opposes, or abscesses occur or signs of blood loss or other things, then treat what opposes you, as previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this procedure because of its severity, then make an incision as I have told you; but when you are sure by our described signs that urine flow has returned, seat the patient on a raised chair; then puncture the abscess in the part below all the surrounding flesh broadly, and place the incision along the full length of the body; make the holes large so that water flows freely. Then put cotton over it, bind it up, and let the remainder of the fluid drain out; then treat until the wound is healed; if a gauze bandage does not allow urine to escape from the opening of the wound, you must use an instrument or method used for treating hydrocele as previously described; thus enlarge the wound, and know that water returns, and gathers together again after six months or so, and when it has gathered like before, then the patient will be cured.
de l’aposteme des coions	Then cauter la le plasters tale of les art, dont the bleu:
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In the chapter of this branch, there are various arrangements causing fear in some people; and I will tell you about the work and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Thus I say that many an abscess comes upon the body, especially on joints; and this happens in numerous cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is known that it arises from excessive bitterness and chilliness, which spreads to the joints or by percussion; and the color of the abscess corresponds with the color of the body's flesh; there is no pain felt, and the abscess is severe; occasionally there are scary and piercing boils of strange colors without blood vessels or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from our blood vessels, it is known by the characteristic of an abscess that becomes hot when pressed with your hands; and one must not even touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 He who is inflamed of veins is known by his disposition to the touch expression of joints, and can well make an incision on this swelling, and on other bruises; and cut off the core of the eye, then extend its upper part upward, and treat it with a white poultice, and relieve the suspensory muscle from all parts of the urethra.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the urethra is already soaked with these bruises, then it is necessary to treat the ureebase and cut off; if it's inflamed at the sphincter or within the vessels, you must relieve all that tissue, and roundly excise.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthmark is present where it should be, one must excise it completely and remove the bone, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once your treatments are complete, apply the woolen bandage with rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other remedies until healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Then cauter la le plasters tale of les art, dont the bleu:
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an infection enveloped with a bandage resembling a bud, accompanied by the softening of tissues, and it moves greatly as the patient progresses; and the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before, but we shall tell you the procedure, according to how the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory around his knees at your waist, encompassing all the fabric near the rod, and grip the ends firmly; then cut with a sharp tranchet across the vessels fully exposed, and scrape from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein appeared, and securely to the other end; then cut around evenly according to body length and remove corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with other bandages applied, ensuring no vessel bleeds from either knee; for by this there is no harm, and if venous blood comes to all vessels, it must be drained through the veins; so that the bones do not lose their nourishment due to cutting into the vessels, and remain dry and can heal.
de la routure dou syfac	For the treatment of scurvy:
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The effects of this remedy are through the section that occurs by stabbing or an extension in the abdomen at the angle region, causing intestines to descend on one side; and this descent is either from the stabbing or the extension, with these two ways occurruring for many reasons: from a blow, a jump, a scream, lifting of heavy weight, among other things; and the signs when it's from an abdominal extension are that it occurs gradually over long periods, not suddenly; and abscesses form symmetrically towards the front because the extension speeds up intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of severed snake, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse abscesses appear near the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body after being bitten by a venomous snake.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And it never leaves in circles with the intestines, and is retained within, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron which cause fear, one must be careful to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of treatment is that you command the patient to clean the intestines with their hands in the wound if it can be entered; then turn them over on his belly between your hands and lift the buttocks; then pull up the skin towards the top, and trim all the fur of the thighs as needed for opening the wound, selecting those that allow you to extract the spermatozoa; then scrape off the hard swelling under the fur of the thigh until it is completely removed from all sides; then insert your index finger where the thigh connects with the body between the white swelling and the second swelling, separating what is behind the belly to the left and in front of the second swelling; and move your right hand towards the top of the thigh skin, lifting the white swelling upwards, and shift all the fur on the spermatozoa towards the body; then command the assistant to extend the spermatozoas upward, separating what is behind it from the rest; and if you find any intestine wrapped or hard swelling, grasp with your fingers and push into the abdamen. Then take a needle made of X threads and insert at the back part after the connection; then pick up the fur that remains below after cutting off the threads, until IV filaments remain; then tie them together in an 'X' shape, and bind the swelling that is behind the thigh fur with a strong knot on both sides. Then wrap the ends of the threads together so no lice can enter inside, which would cause sores not to heal; finally, leave the first knot long enough for two fingers and adjust according to the length of the loop, followed by another knot at this length.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the face that we have mentioned cauterized, after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens, leave the ligament until it heals by itself; and if it does not improve quickly, apply warm water as we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with further care, until perfectly healthy again.
de hernie carnouse	For a carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this method, I have never seen anyone who dared to attempt treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a joint where you bind the nails, after cutting through with slight pressure from above; then make an incision and treat the abscess caused by working on it, until the nails heal; and cure as we have told you, until perfectly healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 There is never rupturing of the anus, as we have said, and open it wide; and do not let any intestines come out at the joints, if they do so, it's minor, but heals completely within hours; however, if it persists too long in this area, there is a wound or hernia until the intestine comes out; and this happens by the dilation of the hernial sac that is at the anus, as we have said, because it's stretched, then weakened and swolculed belly and wide open; and you cure it with a cauterization technique, just as we have told before: and always is not treated by iron in this manner: that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then incise the inflamed area according to the quantity of three fists; then extract the hernia which is underneath the skin that covers it, then take a stick and place it atop the visible hernia; and press gently towards the belly, then cut both sides of the hernial head near the neck of the stick, and both; then remove the head of the stick, and do not cover the hernia or extend any other thing, as I have made you aware in the cure of the intestinal joints; then treat by wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bandage the wound, cleanse it and treat the injury until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is bound, and it has no appearance in the rotation, and the cautery wound heals quickly here, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the leather of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	; so fat de la pigu* bonse t1, that vothae êtes des lefa mous. Doe est; Ifs:d on ma. Ch a ben tre the f. The is some n'sce. A but they.
dou chastrement	By purging
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 It is said that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; however, there are two reasons why it may be necessary: the first is so that the master can respond and provide treatment when asked about castration, and the second because we often need the castration of certain animals such as goats, sheep, deer, and other beasts to assist us.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say then that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the method where we do it by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and relaxed; then grip with your hand, ensuring they return to their place and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the dilation of size: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press its leg skin with your left hand, then tie the suspenders, and cut above each joint after you have properly scorched them; and leaves no part tender or subtle sores on the legs; this method of dilation differs from that made by attraction, because in attraction nothing may remain on the joints so the beast craves relief; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphroditism refers to a condition where an individual has both male and female reproductive organs or characteristics of both sexes. This term was derived from Greek mythology, referring to the deity Hermes/Mercury, who was born with combined features of his parents Zeus (the sky god) and Hermah (a nymph). In modern times, it is considered an outdated and potentially offensive term; preferred terms are intersex or transgender.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphrodite is in two ways among men: one where between the two testicles there are features like those of a woman's nature, and sometimes it does not produce semen.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is in women, and it is above their wrist like a rod and two hoops.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of men and women is that you remove all swellings on their wrists as well as other injuries; in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the skin between the hoops, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	This section discusses an enlargement that may occur on the testicle or scrotum, which can be treated similarly to other ailments and conditions affecting these areas in men.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A swelling is a bump in the natural area, so ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as their hand, which requires treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary to take care of the excess swelling on your hand or wrists and cut it gently; do not remove too deeply, as bleeding should stop before applying another treatment until it heals completely; and for an abscess that arises at the base of the molars, filling it, cutting into it if necessary, and which resembles a cow's udder, hence why they were called by the ancients "cow illness.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to address it as we have described trying beforehand, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Of quaking stones
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 In cases where the nature of the woman is not fully perceived, or her genitals are small; and it is natural by birth, or occurs due to illness that comes upon them; or it's through a clandestine affair, or because of a stealthy dog or snake, and it is caused directly in the thighs, or groins, or elsewhere; and it hinders conception, and childbirth, and sometimes having children; and knowledge of this is acquired by observing her complexion.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swellings are appearing in the arms or thighs.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is on the lower part subtilly, and near two pounds, act swiftly, then take thus: place your index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with legs spread; then extend the two pounds fully, until the subtle syphilic sores are gone, and cover them over; then take wool, and grind it in oil, and apply to the area, rolling a cloth over each day so that it cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilic is hard and spreading, then one must treat with a cream resembling myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscesses are of charcoal residue, then treat with onion poultice and salve; use healing blood-cleansing medicines such as dragon's blood, frankincense, in abundance of honey; then dress a wide gauze bandage so that the wound cannot close; thus be long-lasting, and apply an untreated linen tent; then treat with other remedcuas until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a boil comes with pus, one should cover it as follows in this manner, unless there are hardened abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For the hardened abscess in the boil, it is not to be touched with fire.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids are a condition characterized by swollen veins in the lower rectum and anus areas; it's often due to straining during bowel movements or increased pressure in that region from various causes such as pregnancy, constipation, sitting for long periods. For treatment: encourage gentle hygiene practices to prevent irritation, use of mild soapsuds and avoiding harsh chemicals; recommend softening stool with a diet high-fiber foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains. Regular exercise can improve the blood flow in the body also important reduce pressure on veins from sitting for prolonged periods or straining during bowel movements to facilitate easier passage of stools; warm water baths sitz. For relief swelling treatments may include topical creams and suppository, cly-dilated veins. Apply aids ointment that can reduce inflamed areas swellings with the following: Wearing tight clothing or undergarments snugly socks; as they cause worsen'tilize after bowel movements to the area with warm water and sitz baths twice a day until symptoms. Improve; avoid pressure irritated itch, swelling painful hemorrhoids do not sit too long periods on seat:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Swellings are frequent vein openings that one is not used to; and if swellings become old, they turn into ulcers; we have discussed their types in the division, signs, and symptoms, and here I will say those that respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that swellings and ulcers, when they are fully in the boil and do not appear by touch, but only heal with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that can be felt at the edge of the boil are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Then it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch her thumbs with tongs, and wrap them in their roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, as happens, and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour its feet to the surface for an hour, then make it into cold water; and if bleeding occurs there, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and peel of red apples and hawthorns and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and confine with honey and oil, and place a poultice on its back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it becomes stuck, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, make air cups on the back and at the nipples without causing pain; then take lamb's wool, and milk in juice of plantain or juice of elderberry with wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when an abscess is healed, treat it with ointment until it becomes healthy again; and that which is called "albathir" turns red, and resembles a sharp chief, so cover as I have previously explained the throat; then cure it until it becomes healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many ways of abscesses come in the flesh: like chancres and pus-filled abscesscups and herpes and erysipelas and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot sores, as well as other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, I must address in this treatise the hot abscess that arises on the bone, which is not a common abscess that oozes pus; and if you know how to handle with iron, observe whether the abscess feels warm at the beginning of its appearance, and it's full of heat and fever, and if it appears red upon sight.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hurry to puncture it, but let the pain be soothed first and then seat the patient on a chair with two small pillows under their back, and assembled legs where they are short; let his thighs be spread apart, place his arms below his hips, and tie them well with a good bandage; then gently turn him to lie on his right side. Take the instrument used for working in the mouth of the bone cavity as follows: when you see it inserted, insert the probe first to gauge the depth of the bone cavity, so that whatever enters through the instrument does not go further than necessary and doesn't hurt the patient; if the extensions are larger, then cover the depths of the bone with linens such that the extensions don't harm him. Place the cone of the instrument on top, and dip the instrument in a solution.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 When the abscess is opened and it can be easily handled by hand, cover it with bandages at the head and buttocks; and when the bowels are emptied, put in woolen pads soaked in rose oil or sec olive oil into the wound; place a strong pad over the wound at the base of the muscles, and clean them neatly with water or vinegar that have been boiled; then treat it after two days' worth of poultice, until it is healthy again; occasionally lift the anus and the wound by using an enema of water and honey, and then water or long-stemmed lily root extracts that have been cooked; then return to poultices.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed on the muscle, it must be tended without using iron, but treat as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is necessary at birth that the midwife recognize the natural figure of childbirth and signs when you see a woman hurriedly urinating, and desiring to smell: thus quickly will the baby be born; then declare that this type of childbirth follows the natural pattern, with the waters breaking first, followed by the cord; and when these signs are seen, it is necessary to lightly press her abdamen so the baby can be born soon, for as it comes out onto its head, so too does the cord follow it; and thus the excess mucus is cleared by proper cleansing. And those that come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At times it comes upon his feet, and afflicts the body or head, and hands when it occurs in his belly, groin, and is turned by chance around his neck, and other unfortunate shapes; therefore, healing requires that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and must protect from error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how one should provide assistance.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	the w should docter and the vites.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And it divides the second bone, and severs its nail while the moisture that is within goes forth; and presses the woman's belly as long as childbirth occurs, and if not, then a purging of muskmelon seed with flaxseed oil for an enema to the woman must be performed; next make her sneeze after this procedure by placing something in her mouth and nose for an hour: now facilitate the birth.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands are extended outwards, you should gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot be inserted, place the woman on a chair, lift her feet upward; then raise the chair off the ground, support the woman so she does not slip as she stands; and if the hands cannot be inserted, and the child dies, wrap the hands with a bandage placed earlier, and extract the child, and reset evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 Upon the exit of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out on its feet, you must push it upwards; then gently turn it bit by bit until it's evenly aligned; then grab hold of each foot and extend them slightly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it reaches as far as the knees, if commanded to press, and there is an obstruction of breathing due to condition; if it jumps high, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if not as we have said, slowly and gradually until it becomes according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come as high as we have seen, take musk oil, linseed oil, and melted beeswax, grind everything together in a mortar; apply the mixture to the woman's womb from within and externally with this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until up to her ribcage; when it is softened below, place the myrrh collier around her neck, leave for an hour; have her sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and strain her mouth and nose, gently rubbing her belly as now she gives birth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	For the dislocation of the child in his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, the midwife places her hands here and there slightly; then it lies on its back with feet hanging down, lying on the bed; she bends her hands slightly and then presses them above the belly, removing the cushions below, until it is properly aligned; and if the child does not cry, they straighten their legs normally, move the belly forward, then place their hands; now rock the child gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the dislocation of a child who comes forth with one hand extended wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It's necessary to engineer the return of the hand: if it cannot be returned, lift up the woman and move; if she cannot walk, place her on a bed with legs straightened; then arrange the muscle as I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, and examine how to bring back the hand; gently rock the child according to natural posture, help her sneeebarge.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	by c, and lire iste et sof; And that they n'l.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary for the barber to wash his hand, then turn it slightly and rub lightly; and when it becomes even, apply musk extract and oil as we have said, then command that it move slightly; and after having done so, make her sit on a chair, and order her to swallow; and induce sneezing.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, reset it all at the second attempt
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes to this method for the second finger, wrap your fingernail so that all moisture is removed; and if there are bumps on her face and neck, unwrap them without holding back, allowing the child to move; then insert the infant fully as needed, and command the woman to swallow nothing at any time: thus you shall do it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the displacement of nerves
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	One should know that many times glands arise, and sometimes none at all; this is not a strange occurrence, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that do not live if they lack a name: I know their multiplication and how they are expelled by the leech who prescribes them, which is tied to bile; and neither of them emerge naturally as the rest underneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they emerge quickly, as we have said the treatment should be, and let the subtle biles act, and do so swiftly and lightly what they do; thus allowing them to move towards health.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are not formed in marriages I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they take the form of children by measuring with the wise glorious scale, and it is fitting that the subtle biles act accordingly; for sometimes similar things happen; so do as needed.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When treating a woman who has given birth to a deceased child or is pregnant, as I have mentioned in the division, and there is no forceps delivery needed, and you are required to perform manual work; if it needs to be so that you know whether the woman is of sound health and not affected by any incident or fear of death; then she should lie on her back with her head elevated and legs raised. The attendant will stretch her thighs apart so they cannot touch, ensnaring them as though tied to the bed in such a way that they are separated from the birth process; then rub the mouth of the labia with oily musk made of almond oil, fenugreek seed and linseed; then apply these oils to her hands along with the musk. Next place it lightly into her vagina so that the cone-shaped instrument is suitable for this purpose; if you notice the fetus protruding at the head, gently insert the cone either in its eyes or mouth or on its palate or below the beard or near the anus or beside the legs; and when it's inserted into any of these places, make sure to apply pressure with your right hand while holding a chalice between your thumb and index finger from your left hand, placing it gently in that area until it becomes empty; this is the shape of the cone.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then choose another pin or the one you need for extraction, ensuring they are equal; and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other so that the pins may come out, and have the protruding ends smoothed so they can be moved as described in this manner.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if any part remains, grease the patient's leg with oil and insert it into that part, while treating the other; and if none remain, place this pin or higher in position, moving as much as needed until fully inserted elsewhere.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought together by grasping, it is necessary that you wrap a bandage around above the wrist until fully covered; then bind it at the joint of the foot or heel in this way, and do so for the other hand as well.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If the child's head is large and difficult to extract from its socket, or if it has a high forehead that has formed together, you must push the spatulous spine between your fingers and force open the skull to remove the brain; or use the instrument called "almidach", which shapes come with extensions or handles after this, so also naturally shape the child's head. Then straighten out the bones using pincers, and if the head juts out forcefully, split it until the moisture that is causing the issue comes out; and if it cannot be released, crack it apart by moving what you can; and if it swells in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	humdroit, And ils s'e d’est as it; if the tisnt eyne, and; In the lespie until you is to them so much li byttir, they of lits:
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is troublesome in the abdomen or udder, one must drain it with a cloth wrapped around by hand; and press the abdomen or udder until all moisture has come out; and if other limbs are swollen, and the head remains displaced, then pour balms on its forehead in full of marrows, and drag to the mouth of the marrow; then pour oil or vinegar, and pull gently; and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by an abscess that has come forth, do not work at it, but apply moist and fatty substances; and afterward place poultices, and wash with soft and soothing water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 If the child is under its ribs and you can position it upright, arrange as we have said in live children; and if there is no power, pull the flesh apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the cartilage behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, apply as we have said in abscesses that come to the bone; and if bleeding occurs, put it in a tight bandage, and provide other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman who had a mortal wound, then treat the other as described by.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came an abscess on his buttock, which swelled so much that it burst open, and began causing great suffering.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to seek treatment, and thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it under strong attraction, and an bone emerged, followed by others after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	lesse et so that t;t, the: ziz quet, eus;l.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I will treat the wound and touch the bone with my hands until it improves; and the woman remained in this state for long times thusly, and eventually regained some strength; and I remember this procedure well because when masters encounter an unusual thing, they should seek help to deal with it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the bone fragments to their original position
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After that comes the form of pressure, where one finds books; and two handles with two heads on each chain.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 Also, the horn should be more subtle in restoration, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the instrument must be wide, and its margins a half palm wide; and between two such joints there should be two supports from the same stock, which are firmly fixed on either side by half a palm long or slightly more; these two supports are placed in the jaws of the maris for opening when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made from ebony or boxwood wood as per the look of pliers; it has two horns with supports a palm long each, and one foot wide; when you see opening the maris entirely with all instruments, have the woman lie down on her back with hands raised and legs apart, then place both sets together in the jaws of the maris, holding the headpiece between her thighs. Then work your hand over the entire instrument as you did for pliers evenly, according to the quantity needed to open the mouth of the marangs until she makes it what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	le phuman tre ployt.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it must be commanded that you instruct the patient to retract her thigh, and then insert your hand in the vagina, and restrain their hands at the mouth and nose; and if she jumps through there, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, then you take it (the fetus), and break the bones or make an opening, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the child, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassia, fennel; all these herbs, or any of them, boiled in water or pot over fire; then put a clamp or makeshift spoon at one end and the other head into the mouth of the child, and wait until the vapors come inside the child's mouth; then you cause him to vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you hastily grasp the shoulder blade.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the nurse to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or musk of ambergris, then press into nature, and give a second incision; when she finds it, pull gently and stretch straight so that the cartilage does not come out during extraction; but move it lightly to the right and left, then tug, and it will return and disperse.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 And if the mouth of the cartilage is widened, we have said the cure is to induce sneezing and fumigation with herbs; but if it is not all as we have said, be careful that you do not tire yourself out on this; however, one who is at the mouth of the carttile should tie it to the thighs of a woman, then enema them with medicinal ointment from the tetrapharmacist; if it can relieve and reset, and become strong again; but nonetheless, when it does so brings bad odor to the stomach and head, and weakens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary then you must apply smoke envelopes to this wound: none of the old ones have tried smoking with parsley and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for holding flowers and string is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It appears to be a description of a procedure similar to treating shoulder dislocation or abscess by fire caustery: the hair should grow long and even; if they prick at their base, one must keep them still until they grow. In this chapter's work, there are often blood evacuations during vein openings, abscess incisions, wound treatments, arrow extractions, stone-cutting procedures, among others, which may cause doubt and fear, leading to many deaths. When the shoulder head dislocates due to moisture, it repeatedly dislocates with slight movements; therefore, one must first reset the
de percier lou fondement	Of Percy establishes the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In children who are born without proper perception but with subtle sacs instead: it is therefore necessary for the midwife to puncture those sacs correctly and not pierce the spinal cord, ensuring she does not touch it; then wrap in moistened linen with wine and oil, followed by ointment application until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you suspect that it may reoccur, then apply a poultice of mashed plantain and let it rest for days; remove the bandage when the child wants to get up from bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	and (...)  s; but; they; the present that t.
de la fistule dou fondement	Of the fistula at the base of the bladder
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that arise from below the foundation are nodal, and those growing near the foundation become defective within two parts, whether in one fistula or more; and when such nodal growth is old, it works, and with moisture accumulates bruise or subtle swelling, and never are these fistules present; they are known by what comes out or egestion or windiness when the patient makes an egestion, and sometimes in his vomit a fly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; and they come as far as the hip joint, and near our back of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus you can locate the persistent fistula at the foundation, and it does not bleed: and that you pierce your index finger or thumb, and insert a fine needle of willow bark or iron into the faster when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If there is tortuosity, and he inserts a fine swelling of flesh or a horsehair, as long as you feel the swelling or hair correctly; and if you do not feel it, with no drainage or movement observed as we have said: believe that it does not pierce. Hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or the urethra of urine, then he soils himself with urine and cannot be cured by any medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced to the joint of the thigh, and the swelling comes to its place; if there is no tortuaturdness and the inception of pain is within, then it must be treated with bowing; medicine or ointment does not help such fistulas: they require laborious cure without deceitful remedies from unskilled individuals.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In cases that are not fearful and not old, with hope of healing by fer, as I have tested, where the patient lies between your hands on their back; you lift their legs up to their thighs, keeping their thighs angled towards their stomach; then place a tent made of linen or wool if there is any contortion, until you know how it feels.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around their foundation, then you must insert your index and middle fingers there, if at once they perceive it being pulled back; and when thou dost feel between thy finger the sac or vein, then know that they are sensitive; do not manipulate it further unless one can sanitize it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 At any time one can properly treat certain conditions, but it rarely happens; and the aid used depends on what one does, which is carefully heating the fire caustic according to the width of the fistula as previously mentioned; and pouring hot oil into the flicture until it reaches near the base; doing this once or twice, or thrice, until you know that these charred pieces are ash-like, resembling a bird's feather; then clean the wound with butter until the burnt parts come off, and afterwards treat with ointment to soothe and bind.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus treated, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If this is the case, otherwise it cannot be treated; and if it tries to heal on its own without reaching deeply near the foundation or base of the bone, and there exists a thick cover between your two teeth surrounding the fistula which you see through, begin by closing off part of the fistule at the beginning, then pouring in again before the wound is closed, followed by caustic treatment until it reaches near the end of the closure; afterward the wound will heal and shrink; then remove those charred pieces that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If blood is lost, and it cuts between you and your work, cauterize with fire or medicinal oil.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery combines two things: the drying of dislocated joints and stopping blood loss, as well as removing moisture; then treating soiled wounds with fat or ground chalk until they are washed clean, ensuring that the joint does not bleed again; followed by treating injections from a hard lump caused by charcoal, and drying out these treatments.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And when a fistula comes near the root of its foundation and is distant from the body, if you push with your thumb or finger into it and explore it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent and find bile or joints, or it is about to rupture, do not hesitate with treatments of faith and hope by using one of these three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut off until empty, or if possible clean and heal like before; be careful not to go too deep so you don't damage the foundation that holds it in place, and allow for spontaneous discharge when appropriate; then treat it as we have described. Perhaps it will become sound, or remove the covering near where it is attached at the base, either with tenting or another suitable instrument; then mend any misplaced joints found within the wound to the best of your ability; and manage the fistula in the area further from the foundation: this would be a lighter task for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 At no time are there fistulas according to this method; and when you push the tent into the fistula, it is either close to the foundation near the skin above, so take a pierced tent in accordance with this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And take a thread twisted twice and insert the tent into the hole throughout until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then remove the thread from that punctured tent; and push your finger or foundation into it; and pull on the head of the filament, and join both heads together tightly, and restrain them against each other, leaving for one or two days; do not release at any time until the threads have fused with those in between, and bleed out; then heal the wound until it is united and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	; they totir; a (1: The 1 (uze the first.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to first bind too tightly for support, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well-adjusted.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spatulaceous thorn causing a fistula is very sharp on one end and cutting; and on the other hand not so, for it does not completely or cleanly cut as you see here.
des emorroydes	Of morose sores
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 These growths are in two ways: some are deep within the foundation like a grain of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and they cause blood to flow out from them, and there may be one or several, and they weaken the foundation and at its head; but those that have been expelled have little moisture, and they release either a bit of citrine liquid or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body. The treatment for those found deep within the foundation is to instruct the patient to squeeze out by pressing into chambers until the foundation slips free, and then filaments appear; do not hurry, and pinch them with pincers or use your fingernail, then sever at their roots; if you cannot hold onto it due to its moisture, grab a strip of cloth or a piece of chamelot skin; then pull apart with both hands, trim off, and powder with hot powders that are ready for cauterization; or cauterize as instructed in the chapter on cauterization, because it heals other wounds until they are healthy; and if the foundation cannot slip out, then irrigate the patient with a biting and rough clister to wash away what is at the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patient excretes, and filaments are strong at the foundation, treatment is easy; and you should grab them with your fingernail or pincers, cut off, then treat as we have said, until they are healthy again, and beware of incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to prepare the incision in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread up and pierce the needle from another side, and turn both ends of the thread away from the needle, making it wide; and keep the thread taut, then moisten the thread, remove the needfly, and do this with all others, leaving some excess blood to ooze out; then put a woolen cloth soaked in rose oil or cerotol on the base, and place over it, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him remain until he ceases bleeding, and when they have clotted, treat with ointment and other remedies until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Of the bandage of fat or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	not t: (x1, c; and s cont :
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape off a piece of skin or an ingrown nail that does not allow moisture; then treat until it heals as needed; and if it cannot heal, repeat scraping more strongly than before, until very much healed, and be scorched; then treat until well-healed.
dou fremit	In trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A tumour is a small malformation under the skin, and it spreads widely; and never feels cold, and one senses it like dead from trembling, and comes into all the body, and more in hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that quill over the trembling, until the purple circle surrounds the trembling entirely; then turn your hand all around with the quebble so you scrape it entirely off, spreading it outwards, and eradicate the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a quill of copper or iron as in this manner, and be subtle from below and traverse across.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	does not feel, to hold the head in place, and pressing it; if you see it, then apply heat as is before or with fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of an enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made an enema with silver or gold, or melted wax or leather; and never made from these extracts small and large, as is appropriate for those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	the I:
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enema is as follows: if the belly is tied thus -
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it has an abnormality where the belly is tied up, as you see, and the neck is pierced within; and there should be one of the sides with a hole, and on the other side another hole; and put the remedies from the bladder of an animal or parchment in the belly, and pierce it all around these small holes, leaving space between each hole, then insert a strong thread made of twisted wool through them, tying tightly as with a goat's collar; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument using a strong thread, then administer an enema; and this is the circular shape:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, anoint the head of the enema with oil or goat butter or similar substance, then pour it in gently; then have the ministers grasp it between their two hands together until they are fully filled up, then extract the enema, and let the patient raise his legs to the surface, allowing the medicine to flow out as much as possible; if he sleeps through the night completely, it provides greater relief.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the clyster in cases of bowel disorder, and the patient quickly needs to expel it, then repeat as much as necessary until they are well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are at their base or abscessed, then make the enema as subtle as for a child; and this is the shape of the subtle enema through which the urine is restrained.
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In the section on wound treatment that we have mentioned before; now we will say about hand and medicinal treatments, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of, and where or how the lacerations or injuries are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 Things that wounds are made by thrusting of stones, and sharpening swords and knives or spears, lances, clubs, arrows, or similar things; or they are done according to the regions of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, groin, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs. And I will tell you the cure for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 When a simple wound or gash occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it is from a stone blow or similar causes, with the skin all torn and large wounds present; you may doubt slight pus: immediately bandage the head area if little blood comes from the wound, placing the dressing opposite to the affected part; and provide the patient with plenty of wine and hearty food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he will not bandage himself, let him eat less food and drink no wine or meat, place it on the wound where pus appears, applying a soft cotton ball soaked in oil alone or with clarified wine; and if there is no boiling pus, apply to the fresh wound that contains all its blood, provided it is not moved by air or dust; then I will tell you something later. And if he has moved it, put on some ointments until it is clean.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's edge and gaping, and the lips cannot be brought together with bandages, bind them by suturing, as I will say for stomach wounds, of sutures.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to bone and raw, and holds only slightly with pressure; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hardened leather in its place, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as tested and cooked wheat, as well as eggs, among similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or leather rotten and it no longer holds to the bone, completely peel off the leather and grease thoroughly, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a clot, which cannot be stopped by medicines, try cutting the artery, and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: you must apply this powder that sets as soon as the salt has touched it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of making the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of a dragon two parts; live coal three parts, and make the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold firmly until it becomes well aerated and joins with all its blood; then mix it well, and leave without stirring, unless it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	. The English (and the t'tf; and;
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound has moved slightly, particularly in this way, do not apply any of this powder; but put some digested ointments or wheat flour made with water and honey until it heals over; then treat with other remedies until it is healthy again.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 If there is a bone fracture with the wound and it is small, extract it using subtle tweezers; and I will tell you later about fractures to the head.
de la plaie dou col	From the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck or below and it is a simple one, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins of the neck or the artery are injured.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, if there is no other remedy but to leave the wound alone, and not put anything restraining on them, for it harms the nerves and causes retraction; and do not apply anything cold on the wound, because the nature of the nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; but let medicine be used as you would warm water made soft and mixed with rose oil, and boil it in such water until softened, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wounds are deep and swollen with blood, then pierce or cut it lower; if the artery is severed, remove the clots of blood that come, and ligate, cauterize as needed; and if a spine in the throat is severed, or eyes, and veins remain intact allowing tissue to heal, then push back the jaw with its natural shape, leaving it alone for some days, then treat with medicinal ointments until healthy; and if bone pressure from the wound occurs, treat as necessary. If there are pieces of bone, remove them all that you can, and leave those that cannot be removed until the wound is no longer pressing, drain it thoroughly and straighten the edges; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder to the area I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound of spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a stab wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep causing swelling and pressure on the patient's eyes: acknowledge that the wound is life-threatening; but if it is not deep and all its blood has flown out making it fresh, do not put in medicinal powder at once nor tie with a bandage to prevent blood from flowing out again into the body, causing blindness in the patient; instead apply an attractive ointment and bind it twice daily; if you don't have ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture and let the patient sleep on their back for three days or four or more; spasms, body tremors, and muscle contractions will not occur. And when you see good healing signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat with bandages and other remedies until healed; and if it cannot be healed or operated upon, then determine that there is a fistula; treat accordingly as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is a cut from a sword or knife and is simple or on the back, treat the part that is in front; if it's large, with bandages; and if small, with powder; and if embedded in bone with fragments removed as needed, treat the wound and any remaining shaft pieces accordingly. If not completely debrided, allow the wound to scar over for easier extraction; judgment on other limb injuries should be made as we have described.
dou derrompement dou ventre	if they are not can be c sting et, and de le ou deset l'est est due to heu in les oment le puest men or, with a la est much: b
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 Dislocations are large and medium and small; from the great wound never do the intestines or their nerves come out; and suturing is more difficult, and never worse than a small wound because when resetting the intestines, it requires more effort; for if not continuously heated, the intestines swell quickly upon feeling cold, thus they return with greater force, making minor wounds equivalent to large ones since one sutures the intestines as close to their original position as other injuries. Know that treatments of abdominal ruptures come in four ways: common sutures occur on the abdomen's wound; sutures from other bodily and specific wounds are also common, although they are more suitable with abdominal treatment, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and no part of the intestines is torn, it can be easily repaired in one of two ways: either because of the wound's size as we have said, or because the intestines are swoln due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten with an sponge or soft cloth only in warm water, or boil herbs and cumin and pepper, and apply them until the inflammation subsides; never do what may cause irritation, but rather seek to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the inflammation subsiding, moisten the intestines with water or wine vinegar and cook them well so that they can easily pass through; and if they cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound using the instrument used to drain boils; the first treatment is to stretch it out as needed but do not cut without great necessity, this is for separation: if there is no internal tearing or leaking outside, then observe its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is enlarged and the intestines have burst forth, if you can put them back in place according to their natural form and proper location, do so if possible, for this will move.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is large and located below the belly, it must be that you make the patient lie on their back, with legs raised higher than their head; if it's located below the belly, put the head and buttocks higher than the lower parts; and similarly, in cases where the abdomen is injured on one side, ensure that the affected part is elevated higher than the other; thus you must arrange as I describe for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 To treat small wounds, use the following: place a compassionate hand ministrant over the entire area, then using an awl or more than one based on the size of the wound's width, leave space at the top of the wound and insert the awl with a strong thread; pierce both edges of the skin through to where it is most suitable, and tie together two points within the sinew above the skin, continuing until all parts are connected, then use a double-threaded needle around the awl'wart. Assemble the wound edges immediately, leave space at the top, insert another awl; secure the thread as with the first awl and continue using additional awls as needed until the entire wound is closed; ensure the awls are medium-sized—not too fine or too thick, for they must fit well. The second method of suturing involves one or two needles depending on the situation, piercing through skin edges with a strong thread and leaving space at the top before inserting another awl to continue closure; trim awl points that may bother during sleep and cover them with linens until fully healed; this suture method is more suitable for small wounds. For larger wounds, use one needle or two, bringing skin edges together with a medium-strength thread in the same way as sewing clothes; leave space equivalent to the thickness of a thumb between each stitch; humans recognize these sutures, and I have used them when treating a man's abdomen injured by a knife, wound width greater than one hand's breadth with intestines protruding about two handbreadths.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestines because it had been fourteen hours since he was injured, and I dressed his wound until the fifteenth day, and cared for him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the master thought he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; instead, twice daily, I placed unspun cotton over his wound, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Here are the two proper ways to sew: take the needle and thread it through to the inner side until you reach just inside; when it pierces the skin straight in line with where you have placed the needle, then pull the needle out from another part on the inner side until you meet that point; this stitching method is such that you sew like a furrier makes pelts, leaving one side of the suture open and pulling it closed as you proceed until the entire area is fully sewn.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second manner of suture as Galien properly states is similar to any other where they join the two parts together naturally and apply one end of the silk near the wound to the other, in such a way: thread an awl or silk needle nearby, and perforate only there slightly, leaving both ends of the skin; then turn the needle, and pierce along the part forward until reaching deep inside at the two ends of the skin; then pierce through each end further to reach deep inside in two other pieces of silk on the opposite side; this is the manner of suture commonly used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galen says this word and others agree, that one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and you should push one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the suturing is amidst the belly, it is more challenging than the rest of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The assessments of the wound are such as the assessments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, even if the artery has moved, reset the intestines and the belly; then apply powder mixed with charcoal, and if the artery has moved, put on any ointment available until the wound heals; clip the hairs, dry the sores, and treat them with myrrh; then care for the wound as you would other wounds until it is healthy again; and if medicines are not available, apply cotton cloth moved twice a day until it begins to scab over.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 For in certain conditions where wounds are simple, no other medicine is needed; and if you suspect that the wound has affected the main limbs, it should be lanced lightly with ointment of honey-warm oil or rose oil, placed within the armpits and under the elbows; and if they feel pain or swelling in their bellies, which often occurs, then administer a vinegar enema, especially when there is inflammation reaching to the intestines; and internally probe it, ensuring that since the large intestine is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is distressed, and this is because of the subtlety of its veins throughout the body, and its closeness to one's essence.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 If the sinew springs from the wound, reset it as with the intestines when fresh; and if it is old and turned red or black, then you must remove the black part so that no blood flow resumes, for there are veins and arteries; then bandage what lies between them, and put two fingers hanging down from the side of the wound until eased to ease arrow extraction when sinews protrude, and the wound bulges.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of a boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be repaired in some cases because I have seen a man injured by the stomach of a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the abdamenet and became infected and turned into a fistula, causing discharge and bloating. I provided treatment as best as I could, and did not cease subtleting until healed, and his tissues sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 When I see it welded together, I doubt the patient had pain in his belly; but there was no harm, just better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small injury in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a way: take large grains, then bring the edges of the wound together, and once the gap has opened to mouth width, place it over both lips, so that it pulls its mouth apart; then cover the head with a cap, and this holds so tightly that it cannot come loose, then put another fremit afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully closed; and cut the sutures.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 Those heads that become lodged in the intestine cause no harm to the patient and can be tied with an intestine of a small animal cut off; do this as follows: take the head of such a filament and strip it cleanly, then tie it to a fine linen thread, put the filament through a needle, stitch along the intestine, and secure in place. This method of sewing with freshness is not faulty but depends on trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when located in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health possible except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or when it occurs
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula," especially when it opens and bleeds.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is caused by improper healing that becomes hard and pus-filled, where there is no pain felt, and it opens up like the feathers of a bird; sometimes clear with much discharge, at other times thick; occasionally little, but at others sufficient. And I have previously discussed in the division of wounds, that any unhealed wound does not heal properly for one of nine reasons: it is to say, due to insufficient blood or tissue; or because it has become hard within and on the lips, so no pus exudes; or there is too much discharge; or the flesh is putrid and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for treatment; or due to corruption being a form of pestilence; or the region's nature causes slow digestion, delayed health, and natural decay; or if there are injuries or bones. And I have already shown all these reasons, their signs, and treatments with medicines in that division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula that is done by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistules that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or intestines, or bladder, or any ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet; and if it occurs in the main body part, and other areas nearby.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All such types of fistulas are difficult to heal, with only hard work and ignorance; if there is a fistula that does not reach the areas I mentioned earlier, but you trust in the cure, and you see it coming into being, then take a tent made of wax or iron, depending on whether the fistula is straight or twisted. If the fabric is straight, choose it; if the fistula is twisted, seek out a fine fabric because the wax softens around its tortuosity; and if the fistula has multiple openings that cannot be properly searched by fabrics, use enemas through one of the orifices, as moisture runs quickly from one opening to another, and cleanses it. Then grasp it firmly with your own strength, determining whether there are bones or nerves, and if they protrude inward; ask the patient about pain felt when pressed by hand, and tell them where they feel it, as well as ensuring you have found its exact location—whether it is far from a joint, vein, artery, or sinew. After that, cut according to what I've told you, and remove the corrupted flesh inside; then cure until healed, and if the fistula reaches deeply in the right place, extract completely, covering as much area as possible, after which apply moldy linen cloths soaked with medicine water up to the top of the fistula. And continue applying salves mixed with pure resin until it is clean; if it isn't yet, then cauterize as I have described before. If bones are corrupted due to the fistula, remove them as well.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If the vein or limbs are affected or principal members; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and darkness, you must rule out all bone until the decay is completely osteoporotic; then treat accordingly until it becomes healthy again; and if not, reset as before, knowing that you should not go so far: reveal and clear until reaching the bottom, remove all decay, then restore to its place; if thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the decay is too extensive to approach; there is no other remedy but nature's lashing; and if there are small corrupted bones, you may extract them with pliers using an appropriate instrument for this, and if there are many bangs, pull out all of them without leaving any behind; and if moisture works against it, and there is no error or fear, cope with moisture and heat and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 If you cannot remove them within an hour, place something soaking in pus over the wound to allow it to become covered entirely around the bones; then the bones will have easier movement afterwards; and if it is a large bone, like of leg or thigh, apply as much corruption until it becomes wholly ossified, then close the wound; and if there is a great part affected by corruption, coming to weaken the bone; one must encase it entirely up to the corruption, then treat it until it has become solidified; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened in a man's leg from which you can take example and help for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Once there was a young man of thirty years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body until the materials reached the leg and fled an abscess, without any apparent reason to open; but doctors worked with such folly upon it that they opened the abscess, consuming much matter inside, which became a fistula. A great amount of discharge was expelled from throughout the body, causing moisture everywhere within the person. Several physicians treated him for two years without any sign of skill in hand surgery until I was called upon and saw his leg and the remedies used to treat it; these matter would flow through the fistula into a large part of the body, causing the young man's skin to turn red, with a citrine hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I pitched a tent in one of those places, and then searched all the places, finding that each came toward the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Thus I wasted myself, and sought in one of the places as long as I uncovered a part of the bone, which I found corrupted and pierced, with the corruption reaching to the bone within; it appeared to me from the corrupted bone that there could be no other corruption except what I had shown; therefore I began healing the wound with long-lasting medicines but couldn't sew; then I resumed and uncovered the bone as before, finding continuous corruption in the bebone, which I exposed, and then I covered it, and tried to sew at that spot; however, I could not stitch past an inch of the bone, and the thread snapped completely, so I retouched with medicines; it healed quickly and was securely sutured, and there were no further attempts unless due to the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure, and from fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood often makes him groan, but he was wholeheartedly healthy, and in place of the bone grew a hard callus, which was well-disposed and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, do it as follows: take a ligature, and stretch the head of the bone where the break occurred, and instruct someone to extend it upwards; then put another thicker bandage than the first one, tie it over the callus that lies on the bone, and elongate its head until you pull out the corrupted callus at the bottom, and uncover the callus underne. place where you want to work, so that he does not shorten the callus; then put a tissue or a small stick below the bone to help move the corrupted callus; it should be done as long as one can see and feel the decay, and do it again later if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is within or in a part of it, then reveal the entire char; then apply a hot iron from above, and then move from one part of the corruption to another, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and remove the bone that contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is along two joints, there are no other remedies than dou coper; and if the corruption is at the end of a hand or foot, it is very serious but nonetheless you must find out how to open that corrosion and cleanse it in all ways possible, but ensure that vein or nerve does not cause pain. Be aware that the saws and coper for these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, as well as their size and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; therefore it is necessary to prepare a tool suitable for each type of operation. Be aware that your craft will show you the instrument needed based on your understanding of this art, and the signs in how diseases behave; thus consider which instrument is appropriate according to what must be done.
dou feu	If by fire.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may rot or swell due to moisture, or from heat; and when you have applied the medicinal cure for such conditions, but they do not help, then cover that limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient may escape either by death's approach, or by some other means which is greater due to the failure of the limb; and the signs are such that the limb turns black as if it were scorched with fire, and afterward follows the darkening, because corrosion spreads from member to member throughout the body; be quick in covering it up, especially if caused by the sting of venomous creatures like sea scorpions, serpents, etc., and if the corrosion is at the head of the knee joint, then cover it but do not give it any time before reaching the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it comes up to the hand, cover the joint fully to prevent reaching the arm; and if it reaches the arm, wrap with a cloth; and if it passes the cloth, death is likely, and no remedies have effect except for the extent of its power; thus do so whenever corrosion occurs or spreads: if it affects the first joint, cover subsequent joints; and if it spreads to the arm, wrap entirely around it; and if it ascends the leg, cover at the knee joint; and if it goes beyond the knee, there is no other remedy than a tourniquet for the patient's death; the manner of wrapping or bandaging the limb should be such that you bind above and below, extend some strips from each tie onwards, then sever the tissue between the two bindings by an inch wide so bone is exposed; then wrap with cloth, applying a layer of linen on either side to prevent contact with healthy skin, allowing further harm or sores.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 When blood flow changes while working, promptly cauterize the area or apply constricting powders; then return to your regular treatment until complete, bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until healed; and I will tell you what happened to one person: a man experienced blackness resembling fire burns, which first appeared on his fist's thumb pad, spreading throughout the entire thumb; upon seeing the corrosion, he covered his hand with a copper vessel and was cured; later, the corrosion reappeared at his elbow joint, coming to me for treatment, and I treated him using impactful materials after body purification; but could not stop the corrosions. Although I wanted to bandage his hand, hoping to reflect the matter elsewhere, doubting whether if I cut his hand he would die because of his weak constitution, so he lost hope completely and returned home, where he covered his hand until cured; this is a method worth mentioning for future reference, if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Never does an abscess come to a head quickly, and it remains so long that it causes a large accumulation of pus; then they grow and burst, and through the swelling the pus flows, and the eyes of the veins remain shut as if with cataracts; and the skin above is as fine and delicate as cut lace, not reaching to the bone nor nerve, thus these ailments are called 'healed' but not 'fistula'; however, if it becomes so elongated that it reaches the bone entirely, then it is deemed a 'fpectula'; and when cutting this skin one should remove all of it completely, especially if it is delicate like lace; and it will not worsen due to its decomposition.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if you are confident that the flesh is sore and there is no fullness, and the skin is of red wax, then in this way use an enema: check if the seams are large, and the bowl which contains it is foul-smelling, then thus prepare a medicine from Egypt as follows: take ease, oil, and litargo equally, put to cook in a vat over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take some of this according to your need, and mix with water and he nectar, and enema into the seams, and strain the passage; leave the medicine within for II hours, then squeeze out; do this many times until the flesh is restored and the hole is closed; never use an enema of water from ashes when this medicine is not present, but take ashes of vine wood and pour water over it, then strain, and continue using it until you know the seams are well healed; if the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or water with ash, use an enema with a little litargo dissolved in honey or mead wine, as honey has the property of cleansing and purifying, and wine promotes health. When you have done this, and are confident that the flesh is well restored, then prepare to bring wax forth from it by using beeswax with oil and honey wine; or use an enema with certain medicines mixed with ointments, whose properties I have discussed in treating ointments. If the passage within the breast is small, and cannot allow entry of the enema fluid, then widen it slightly with a piece of iron, and apply a bandage of Egyptian or basilisk ointment until it widens; if the wound is too large, leave enough space so that the enema may enter easily.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is in fullness, do not let it be exposed to wind and cold; if you cannot cover its back as you see fit, arrange so that the bow faces downwards towards the lowest point possible, for when the bow is full, do not expose it to wind or cold and if you cannot cover its back as you see fit, adjust in such a manner: let the bow face slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow exposed; take consolidating medicines to apply on the wound, and extend linen cloth over all the area. Then cover the strength spot with additional linen wider than the first cut, after applying ointment on another piece of linen according to the size of the cut, and place it over the wound to support the bow, and do not remove the large linen until after a few days; those who are under the cloth covering the strength spot should often change positions to assist with pulling the bow out, and determine whether venom, small amount, or sufficient quantity has come from the bow, or digestive or indigeste. Take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine spreads as expected, you will see that the chest tightens, and moves towards healing; then untie it in the morning or after a day, and once you open the wound, change linen cloth, and renew ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	they le de:
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 If subtle symptoms come after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for the sickness approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For there are men whose pus is delayed in their wounds and those who do the opposite; if a bowel indigestion occurs after many days without passing wind, know that the breast does not itch at all; and if the breast delays from releasing its contents, and becomes hardened over time, then apply dry medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, like an ointnent ending, for there is a great part of lead, which is the last medicine; take dyaphinit oil, mix it with rose-colored oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance; then confit and use it; similarly done with honey cooked until thickened, when dyaphinit ointment is not present or you take mirra, aloe, and frankincense, and grind them together, and powder over honey while on fire; then mix with a piece of cloth, and apply to the breast, and never use aristolochia long-stemmed, or lily roots from heaven, which are like wheat flour and semolina; and for simple or compound uses: grind them, and make into powder, and put on honey as I have said, and use it; if the treatment is extensive and has not been treated by this method, then understand that corruption spreads throughout, causing pressure in the bones, or hardened limbs, or ligaments; then apply fistula cure as we have previously described.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of an abscess of a nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or sometimes in other joints; and when it becomes filled with pus, but no precautions are taken, so does the abscess spread, and burn and spit blood until it reaches the base of the nail, and possibly consumes the entire nail; and bone inflammation occurs up to the point where there is foul-smelling pain, and the joint becomes swoleback.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then one must excise all the excess tissue from underneath the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caustic is of great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; when the nail becomes inflamed, begins to throb, and blisters, it's necessary that you place a razor underneath the nail so that the pus points, and pushes upward, then carefully scrape off the subtle pus, and apply on top medicines with heating and corrosive properties to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if there is corrosion in the bone, scrape it and treat it thoroughly, because as long as the bone deteriorates thusly, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint becoming corrupted, treat it as mentioned beforehand, then cure until it becomes healthy; but if it is hardened with pus, and bloody, first relieve the pain; then scrape the nail underneath along a crooked line from side to side without reaching to the pus that lies underneculed, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something above which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	to be a;
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocated shoulders that are found in some men by chance are all flesh, and sometimes there are bones present, and at other times only a part of them is there, and none of these arise from the root of the joint where the origin is among our shoulders.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Those that arise within any of our shoulders do not move, and those that arise from the joint of the shoulder may move; the stature of the fleshly ones is light in certain ways: lengthen them at their root with a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat; hold them firmly with your hand.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In those that arise from the last of our shoulders, it is necessary to first bandage roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then treat until healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	so that the main; y-line contertret ond le JJSH: he c m, forta.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to cover that swelling, so that the parts may be rejoined according to their natural shapes; then place between two tents or oiled cloths with pounded meal, ensuring they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine plaster, until the joint has been healed as it should.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	should be and they are not the s.
des vils	 If a wickedness befalls you
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large and thick coverings filled with malignant melancholy that come upon many limbs of the body; it is more common in legs of those who walk on crutches or work hard and bear weight, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	by him t saye est plus other thatt.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is to cover it and bleed the black blood; the other way is to lift the vein and drain all the blood from it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The back is arranged in this manner: raise the first leg with very hot water until the larger part is thoroughly warmed, then strain the leg from the patient's hip up to just below the buttock; then cut into the vein at one spot, either one, two or three places wide, and squeeze out the black blood by hand from top to bottom as much as the virtue of the sick can endure; then tie it off, and instruct that they bandage with white meat coagulum; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, causing no harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The treatments for this condition are as follows: raise the afflicted leg if it has a lot of hair, then give them a bath, and warm the leg with hot water until it turns red, causing the veins to swell; if you do not have a bath, heat in fire instead, and then cut into the vein long at the head of the groin or at another place above the ankle; then treat the skin around each part as much as one feels when touching it; and it appears red and black, and when inserted under the skin it seems like a white thread; then pull out the suture from below until it comes up to the skin level, and then cut lightly again with another incision at three finger widths above; then treat the skin over the vein as much as one feels, then remove the suture just as before, and make another incision if needed; then cut in another place or more places if necessary, and remove it, and cut to the knee, and pull and remove up to the second incision; then separate each piece until all is removed completely, then tie off; and if you cannot suture and lift, put a needle through a double thick thread, ligate it, draw out at either end, and move your hand back and forth as much as possible so that everything comes out. Be sure not to cut it because if you do, it cannot be lifted or removed, causing harm to the patient; once all is treated, place soft linen in wine and oil on top of the wound, and care for it until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 If the vein is twisted and coiled together and not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it up; and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to cut veins should be curved, and not sharp, so it does not sever the vein; it must have a large curve because if it were too fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 Of the civil vein. (Note: This phrase may refer to
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is located in the legs, warm parts or places where no plants or trees grow, and land that has no moisture; it may also appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs due to putrefaction coming from underne.skin leather as it does within serpents and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it comes in the leg as a great swelling, then the lump changes, and the vein begins to bulge outward, like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head is opened, it must be wrapped with a piece of cloth about one and a half to two fingers thick down to the vein, the node, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time there is no discomfort, wrap around the cloth, and the wound; if it is too long, cut off part of it, then wrap the remainder without covering its root until it has completely exited; for if you cover it, it will re-enter into the flesh, causing an abscess or rot at that spot, and a serious illness; therefore, this vein must be treated slowly and gradually up to completion, leaving no remnants or scars; and there is never failure of this treatment when applied with five to ten handspans long, or with one man who came to me, from whom it exited ten handspans long, and when you wrap it, two fingers or thumbs wide are made, piercing all the way down to the bottom, so that everything inside is emptied; then apply a preventive rot medicine for a day, after which treat like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 On no occasion to the vein hands rain, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and there is much bleeding, then treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 And from worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "ox sickness," because it often occurs on the buttocks and is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body upward and downward, causing great pain as it travels from one part of the body to another, becoming very hard; and it causes swelling due to various humors, similar to serpents, lumbrics, and ascarids or worms in the belly; people doubt its nature because when it moves through the body, it ascends to the head and reaches the eyes, possibly entering them by chance and destroying them; this occurs often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being cleaned and emptied, one cannot force it when going; thus, it must be anchored above and below a strong tie tightly, then bandaged over and cut further, and if the wind is caught in the sails, as we have said, then sewed with fire upon until dead; and the greatest harm it causes is that it tears out the oil, as mentioned before; and if you see it coming or near to the oil, firmly restrain its eyelids, then bandage over, and cut further; one must use medicinal body purifications for evil humors, and wash with putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain which arises from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "waqir" in our land, and it causes pain in certain limbs, which moves from one member to another; and I have seen this with my own eyes.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to see a sick woman and found swelling in the arm vein; then shortly after, I saw it move like a worm up to her shoulder faster than anything else, similar to how live silver flows from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled into the shoulder, then spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm. Later, she told me that she felt returning towards the chest in the same way I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	sofle a lisso:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 However, I have seen that many want to move the pain elsewhere, but they do not, as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because she had dry skin and exposed veins, and thus appeared constrained bloating; and those who are delicate do not show such a reason, nor those with moist skin and reopened veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain if it reveals itself as we have said, quickly draw a line above and below hastily, then cauterize there; and if you do not see bubbles at your eyes, treat those who cause trapped bloating like rotten pills, and pills of serpentwood, and similar things.
des saiettes	 Of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrowheads are diverse, depending on their appearance and the way they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The various types of arrows have those with large points and small points, feathered ones and barbed ones; some have two angles, others tongue-shaped heads, or segmented pieces. Those that enter any limb do so in one of two ways: either the principal parts such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it enters any of these limbs, the signs of death that I will tell you later become apparent: if one must extract this arrowhead, for death often follows in various ways; and if this ill sign is not evident, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then treat (the wound) and care for the injury.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow enters and pierces the bone, causing pain in the forehead, is darkness, numbness, twitching, reddening of all eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and muddled understanding, vomiting of bile; and sometimes without fever from the nose or ears; and possibly losing speech and voice; and pain in the wound appearing white like hairs, and healing similar to a bruise; and if this sign appears to you, take care for the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is not out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it enters or exits feels close to the left breast, and seems as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow; sometimes the arrow moves like hairs, with black blood coming out, followed by chills, cold sweat, and fainting: then you have reason to suspect death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of arrow wound is that without clear foam from the wound's exit, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	that f but mor:
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	When an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach, if it comes from the wound, then no part of the digested flesh is spared.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow falls or lodges in the stomach and does not pierce any part of the intestines on its exit, there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow falls into the bladder and the urine flows out upon its exit, and the patient feels intense pain: understand that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as made by the fingers and knuckles and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and neck and thighs, and similar members are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the shaft is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisonous as I will tell you of how it happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the root of his nose; I tried it, and pulled it from one side against the fat of the ear, and he was whole without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled out an arrowhead that was embedded in the fat of his cheek beneath his jawbone, and the arrowhead had been retrieved, and only its tip could be reached by hand; it was a large arrow from a Turkish bow without ears, lightweight like any iron bar; the shaft was whole, and no misfortune befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabic arrow with ears: I cut off its barbs and skillfully extracted it until whole, and the Christian remained unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And pierced by an arrow to the abdomen, believing he would die; and after thirty days passed, his condition did not change; I cut below the arrow, manipulated it, removed the obstruction, and there was no adverse consequence.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if a person has an arrow fall to their back and the wound is closed up; it remains lodged inside them without changing its natural disposition or causing harm in any of their natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And another man who had an arrow fall on his face with the wound closed up suffered great pain and much of the like kind.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And pierced by an arrow to the king's prince, lodged within his chest and slightly tilted towards the right side; fully embedded three days later, I was called for treatment after its arrival.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And I pursued it with all subtlety, and did not feel it; but it caused pain and discomfort from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the arrow's tip; I placed a poultice with soothing properties on it because there was no swelling; and the arrowhead appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I applied the poultice for three days, and seeped out the wound completely, and thus the patient suffered long periods until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for days until it was open enough to try; and then I prodded at the opening of the wound with that corrospective medicine, so that the arrowhead became clearly visible to me within four months; and well did the termination pass through. Then I healed the sore by placing pincers on one side and another, but it could not come out; then I ceased using crude methods and devised various ways of draining fluids until a day came when the wound was closed completely with properly made tongs, according to how its form will appear at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the physician judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will restore it immediately, and the wound is closed, and the patient is entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 Or have I explained the quality of arrow extraction; apply your care to what I haven't mentioned, for the book cannot cover everything completely; but the wise masters in this field achieve much with little effort and focus on what is present and failing, providing nine works of labor and using nine instruments, dealing with unusual matters that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows lodged in the limbs are fished out either by where they enter or from another part; and those that shoot out as they enter, are arrowheads entering into fleshly tissues, and never do so more than once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not heal now, leave it so that the cartilage may properly dry out and detach; and similarly if it is embedded in bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, moving slightly each day; then it will heal, and if it still does not heal, puncture around thoroughly until all moisture is removed, and then follow treatment.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is embedded in the bone near the top of the head and reaches up to one side of the brain cavity, causing any of the incidents I previously mentioned for the patient: do not attempt to extract it, but leave it so that after several days it may equalize, as if the arrowhead comes out this way, it is a death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrow is not lodged solenly in the bone and does not reach the joint, and the patient experiences no major change for some days, then attempt to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very firm and cannot be released this way, then treat with tars drops as I have told you; then care for the wound until it heals soundly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrow is repositioned within the body and cannot be seen, use all available means to search for it; if you can feel it, extract with any suitable instrument; and if extraction through widening the wound or deepening into the shaft is not possible due to lack of bone, nerve, or vein, explore until the arrowhead's opening is large enough; and remove the arrow if possible. If there are ears on the arrowhead used for gripping, break off one part that you can reach from either side, then break or bend the ears so as to extract it more easily. Be careful not to break the arrow during extraction, aiming instead to pull it out smoothly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, should the arrowhead be deeply embedded near its entrance, then draw it out, for extraction would be painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 If the flow of blood goes against you, arrange as we have described in the chapter; and avoid incision into the nerve and vein, and apply a technique to draw out the arrowhead without danger, either soon or late, gently or firmly; position the patient according to how they were formed when the arrow fell upon them, for that is the greatest aid possible, and if you cannot do so, place accordingly as signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 For an arrow that comes from the other side and has not broken any part of itself or where the skin is swollen noticeably: thus cut down there as far as the forceps can reach, then extract it; if it jerks up strongly now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if held within the bone, rotate your round hand so that it enters the bone, then widen the bone before extracting it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, leave it as is for now and resume extraction once the arrowhead has been fully extracted; if the arrowhead is embedded in all of it, replace with the entire piece; if part of the arrow shaft remains, administer a suitable bandage to address this, using an instrument whose tip can enter into the handle of the tool; then insert further and if the arrowhead is lodged, place the instrument at an angle for easier extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is contaminated, it is necessary to cut out all surrounding tissue where the poison resides, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead has pierced or is near the abdomen, bladder, or ribs, and it's close to being reached, proceed with cutting around it if you can, then remove; but be careful not to cut into the vein or nerve, after which extract the arrowhead and dress the wander, as needed; ensure healing until it is completely healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles an eagle's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many ways to handle it: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the pointed hair is also like the feather of a bird, to direct it towards the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pincers for both setting and retrieving:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of common bodily veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins that are seen on the head are XXXI in number, of which there is a chief XVI, which includes: two auditory branches located behind the ears called "herbech"; and two arteries visible in both temples; two vessels found within the eyelids, known as "aspires"; the vessel that lies amidst the forehead; the vessel atop the nose bridge; and the two carotid arteries situated on either side of the neck; and the two vessels located above the lips, just outside of the mouth, which are also called "augeherich"; and two vessels found below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins which are commonly found in each arm: one is the cephalic and is on the left side of the shoulder blade, and they call it "the people's chief vein"; and the other is called "fastidious," composed of cephalic and basilic, and they call it "people's heart vein"; the basilic is also on the right side of the shoulder blade, and they call it "people's belly vein", and is under the muscle, and that is where one draws blood clearly above the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the salvatic vein is the one that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, with two branches; and in the leg where there are three veins: the first arises from below the shoulder blade of the left side, and the second femoral which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "ness", that is found in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are also three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The sainer of veins located behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines; and its quality is as I have told you, it involves raising the head of the patient, and rubbing the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the neck with a bandage until the two veins appear behind the ears at two points on either side of the skull: secure these with your thumbs, wherever you feel hair growing over your thumbs, clamp them down; then take the lancet and make an incision just above the vein to the bone, then lift your hand all along the length of the vein, cutting through tissue and skin cleanly across both sides of the wound until blood flows out; then compress it tightly until it is healed; and I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization as in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The vein of the two arteries that are in both temples, is inflamed and swollen and hardened from customary treatment and shedding tears; and its quality is such as I have described: causing the patient to turn their head until the two veins appear openly; they feel pain behind their ears, then become congested; then remove the hair at the top of the ear near the second finger, insert the lancet there, and draw out the vein upwards towards the eyebrow as with other veins; then make incision according to your judgment based on necessity for bloodletting; then bind the patient, place their head upon the vein for an hour, then cover it with cotton; next apply a formal poultice and leave it until healed. We have often discussed their copiousness and extraction in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The surgery of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the surgery for cranial diseases of old face, and migraines, and redness; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called 'fossoyer', which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the tip over the vein, and elevate from your hand or other object, allowing blood to flow out according to the quantity you see; then relax the patient's neck and tie off the vein so that it is neatly closed without any leakage from a wide wound edge.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	the s ;
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The surgery for veins in the eyelids helps with swelling, itching, redness, eye pain, and facial diseases; its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until one of the ligatures loosens as before; then seal them and perform a shallow incision on the groove for some length and width but no charring.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are fine and delicate, perhaps they break; then make an incision in the blood, as much as you need, and afterwards bind with cotton, and secure it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the nose is worth an attack by water, and sudden fevers, as in migraines and rashes that come on the face, especially when it is longstanding; and the quality of this vein is such that patients tighten their neck, then strain their nose to their left hand, taking a subtle, long breath, and inserting it halfway into the lip just within the space between the two nostrinsces because the vein does not open well on its own, and the blood will start flowing immediately; do not go too deep, and make the bleeding according to your necessity, then tie it off for a night as it is restored quickly; this is the form of the thread.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The tension of the two tendons aids in stretching the alaunis, and at the beginning of surgery, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and strumous fever; and the qualities of the tension are such that the patient stretches his neck on both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient is seated on one side, then treat the vein somewhat widely for a while, then promptly stop the blood flow, or as much as needed; then repeat in the other vein, then loosen the ligaments, and strain between the veins gently, so that the patient does not strangle himself; and leave until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the liver inflammation
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of vein lips above contributes to wounds in the mouth, and decay of gums, and tears of lips, and ulcers and abscesses.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The condition of liver inflammation is to have the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right side and the other on the left, recognizing them by their blackness and small black vessels around them. So clip both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, clip the larger of each pair, and likewise with those above and below, as they are all made the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 for inflammation underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The condition of the veins underneath the tongue aids after cephalic inflammaturgy and is related to throat stretching, eye diseases, and mouth maladies; the procedure for this treatment involves holding the patient's head with both hands towards the sunlight, lifting his tongue, and examining black veins on each side: clip them all, but not too deeply, as these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins of the foreskin that are commonly incised in various ways: either by gripping all along its breadth with fingers, or using a slender tool like sharp scissors, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and narrow according to the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the wormwood is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open veins with plain heads that contain abundant and visible blood, and are of the form of a slender blade.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and are more subtly pointed, and suitable for tying up fine veins where there is subtle lemon-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The incision of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, assists with diseases located under the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the surgeon that he skillfully makes the incision, and cleanses from the artery located there.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if you puncture the artery, and blood flow occurs, then it must be stopped as I have said; and the flame should not burn but cut like a razor.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the bile duct does not open clearly, then you must extract it and choose another; or you wish to apply heat near it, or place it in its original position within the vein under the arm: it opens clearly; and puncture with a flame like a razor as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you know the location of the swelling, then extract the arm in such a way that you touch the skin where you see hair; sign with oil afterward and bind the arm, and puncture the vein like a razor with a flame as we have said; be careful not to hit the artery when you see the swelling expanding because it is an artery: avoid this.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you see it protruding upwards like a child's urine, and the shaft is red and fine, know that it is from an artery: then quickly place your finger lengthwise underneath it; as often happens this way; if it is the arm, leave it so and do not move it for the patient; let it rest in fear until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	s the her.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Take a strip of fitch (periwinkle) plant and crush it, then take one half and apply until the next day; if the shaft is stopped, that's good; if not, cure with powders that stop blood as we have said before, in various conditions for the small place of the wound, and strength to the limb.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The bandaging of the vein allows it to draw blood from above and below, as it is composed of both basilic and cephalic parts, as we have said; and the sorbent must warm up for the nerve located below, and if it is too much on either side, then he finds the nerve, which becomes swollen and painful with inflammebody, and sometimes cannot cure. This nerve often opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any of these people due to its subtlety, then you must use a silver snake for treatment; avoiding the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is blood between the two veins, it flows for a long time.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The bandaging of the cephalic part helps to draw blood from the head and aids in healing wounds; one should gently press near the olivaire vein or mirtine vein, for it is the most effective of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the most gentle remedy there, and do not strain anything if you must try the first time, and then start over; sometimes the joints swell in some men when trying for the first time, but do not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of this disease is according to what you think.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about health care is that treatment should be done only to maintain health and avoid future diseases; it can be made in one of the three ways which are known as: cranial, abdominal, and pelvic; and treatment should begin at the onset of gout during spring and autumn after eating when signs of repletion appear; and treatment should take place on the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healing practice for illnesses does not have a fixed hour but rather when needed during the day or night at all hours and times; and it is not appropriate to treat children up until fourteen years old, nor women carrying more than seven months gestation up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not let them exercise too much if they are old men who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When anyone wishes to heal in any way at all, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much feces retained so that the veins do not carry excess waste harmful to essential organgs; and one should not heal those who are very weak from foods, or intoxicated in any way. And when healing after colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent bowel movements in women and men, lack of sleep and mating, all virtues whether by wounds from weapons or diseases; then subtly remove the humors if they are heavy through foods and drinks as well as medicines, provided you have permission to do so. Then take a bath unless anything prevents it, in order to refine the blood and cleanse the veins near the groin as we have said before. And avoid work, hardship, lustful behavior, or similar things on that day; stay bound and joyful, and have the healers perform their rituals higher than those they treat, and rub your arms twice or three times, then remove the ligature halfway because if it is too tight or loose, you cannot properly treat the wound. Then rub the body with a bit of old oil, then place the right hand above the vein at the desired treatment point so that the blood does not flow out and stick to the tool.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee like strings in a lining, and some which lie flat from thinness of their vessels; so when it is placed on the flame, it retracts into itself, cannot open the vein, and thus they occur as such; and if one opens the vein, then the wound becomes too narrow, for this reason one must be knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	: If you say is not the 30 s.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the wound is swollen, and the patient grows hopeful, allowing a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps he will develop abscesses thereafter; do not give him a bath, then resume dressing it as he prefers; and if the outlet is small, or the vessel subtly corrupted in which you doubt that it does not bleed so much as you see, place your confidence likewise on that same outlet under direct heat; apply the remedy somewhat hastily, thus making sure the wound swells up again; for this often happens when the injury is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the area swollen, do not attempt to start bleeding again, and apply a bit of oil, as it soothes the body with pain, and makes the lymphatic vessels malleable in this place like oil; thus manage the oily salve on each vein you treat, to constrict the flow of blood; similarly for triacle and bowels when applied to the area.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if a large abscess occurs frequently, especially when the opening of the vein is small and hastily treated with a damp sponge in warm water and some hot salt, hold it for an hour; then make sure to apply this afterwards once the blood has drained from the vein. If there remains any discoloration or greenish tinge at the site after several days, do not be alarmed; if you see such a thing, apply something like aloes or myrrh in calamine oil mixture, balm, or similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often occurs abscess and appearance on the base of the bladder; therefore put your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under pressure from your hand, then that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be careful not to put on anything of what we have said, for sometimes a stone may block the artery; but first make an uncured plaster to harden the place, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each medicine according to the quantity and color of its virtue in the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and if you see a large vein, allow it to continue until it becomes thinner; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And for those who are flat and barely sustain the need for blood extraction, make a wider wound so that it is broad; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, offering support often and regularly, and by cutting across rather than pricking; this manner of treatment prevents blood flow issues and nerve compression, and prefers short, narrow stitches.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for those whose body needs suturing, give them ground meat pudding in pomegranate juice; if they are exhausted, feed them three times or four. If they have a cold disposition, serve the same pudding before the sutures in honey syrup or flavored honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, as well as an aromatic syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it is swollen with blood after the loss of much blood, then one should give him a broth of charcoal, and an aromatic syrup, and use other remedeby which we have spoken in the section on fainting, for evacuating blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if one wishes to drain the arm veins or treat elsewhere when it is greatly swollen from blood loss, they should bleed slowly and continuously according to the amount of its potency.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	et s, by the so pleis an t and; and:
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if you wish to heal another area, it must be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; then one must bleed a great amount, and dilate the veins until they flow freely into an earthen vessel; after which you should treat all conditions of swelling, and place your hand on top of hairs when it sweats, so death does not come during purging, as this happens often with negligent practitioners. And do not bleed the arm again and cause blood to be expelled a second time if the veins are closed; instead, press firmly above them. If they are congested, extend the arm quickly but not hastily; otherwise, leave it until blood is purged from the vessels a second time; or at the point when frozen blood in the vessels has melted and you have placed some water on top of the skin, gently press above.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if bleeding is needed a second time, let the blood flow to the same place or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	which painful and.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The manner of the saignée is that the patient places his hand in hot water until the vein appears red; then it should be tied securely so the vein is clearly visible, and the saigne will be performed across, not too wide or long; ensure the opening is wide enough near the joint of the hand without allowing any to escape, after which place the hand back in hot water and let blood flow into it until you have enough; if this condition occurs, do not resist bleeding again with hot water as it is more common in winter than summer; the saignée from this vein is more effective compared to all other methods, for there are no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The swelling of the salvatella on the right hand is suitable for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: stretch the hand and pour hot water into it until the vein is emptied; if you see that it has been turned sideways and you grasp it entirely without causing harm, don't worry. Don't use too much force because the nerves are close to the surface of the skin, and then place the hand in hot water again if the sinew is frozen at the wound and can't escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the bleeding as much as is necessary, apply oil and wool to the vein so that it can be quickly healed, doing this for each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	; you maye:Tud:t; the same and then that is c. The 1: don master they can le Otre toha vie (O contcur� su cesse est paire;
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The treatment of the Sophene is suitable for all diseases that arise from within the body, such as bone marrow ailments, retention of fluids, kidney disease, and old conditions of hips, thighs, and legs, among similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his health is such that the patient puts some spit in warm water, and rubs it on the vein until it dries, and lays over the joint near the foot; then the vein goes up quite a bit above the ankle, or more from the foot, depending on how much he moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you wash on the foot, guard against the veins that are near it, and wash through them as when licking with a sponge; and let the fumes be diffused evenly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and let the vein empty completely.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the physician needs to do it a second time, he resets it slightly above as salt is present in the area; do not fear nerves, as we have said, and so treat both feet equally with soapwort.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The source of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to heat.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient lies in or takes a bath and strains above the ankle by four fingers in twisting motion, otherwise it will not open up; if opened, you should cleanse thoroughly in all ways possible and across; he must move gently to lift it, as the place is sensitive, and it has risen quite high.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 If you do not succeed in locating it, select any part of the arm that opens or bends easily, and move towards the elbow joint, and protect the nerves; then observe closely to see if there is bleeding, and once stopped, ligate the vessels, and apply a cotton compress; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Removal of pus-filled abscesses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventoses are made of horns, or glass, or ivory; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking to draw blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping therapy is performed in two ways: either with hot fire or without fire; and the removal of pus that is done by puncturing and extracting blood occurs at fourteen points on the body - one being the crown of the head, another midway up the neck, others on both sides of the neck, below the chin, above the shoulders, over the spine, along either arm, along both legs, across both ankles; and this cupping does not draw blood, but causes minor bleeding scattered throughout the skin, so that no one is harmed as in vein treatment; and it should never be done with heat or without heat during any illness caused by excess fluid retention until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if by necessity due to diseases or habits, we perform bloodletting at the beginning of each month or end, and in every moment; for there are those who, when they need to bleed, feel heavy heads; and there are those who experience fullness and reddeness on their face, forehead, and neck, and blindness; and such as have a drop of blood in the mouth, with swollen tongue, oozing blood; and some think and see through blood-filled and painful and deadly visions.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	the or ent chir plowed with bleus is not to them and, then s't and it if you so, but the paints in them et de that are, ici les peche l'on est.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The bleeding of the brain helps with greatness ... that comes to them, and it must not be after emptying all their body; this bloodlettcuhing is in line with the cerebral bleeding, and should only be used by those who are cold-tempered or have hemorrhoids, for it greatly harms them; thus one should not use it if they suffer from great head ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who suffer from it often become lazy, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower down due to fear of inefficacy.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventilation within the neck is at the level of the throat and base, and therefore it affects the expansion of the chest, and fissure of the channel of the windpipe, and all things, and repletion; and little pressure should be applied, for if held too tightly, it may cause obstructed breathing or stomach issues and mental distress.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventilation of the ribs in the collar causes pain in the head, toothaches and migraines, as well as strangulation, and pain in the root of teeth; it is at the level of the base's throat. And you should instruct the cauterizer to apply his hand gently without pressing too hard on the artery or causing blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventosities below the chin are associated with oral disease, and decay of gums, and various illnesses found in the mouth; it is related to the sanity of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The inflammation of the shoulders is a disease arising from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosation of the elbows is as much as three veins in the arm because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the ligator not to pierce too deeply, for the joint is near bone, and there are nerves and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cushion on the croup is like hemorrhoids at the base and diseases below, it must be large and made of wool, requiring thorough shearing; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break; and it causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the leg cushions bleed openly because they attract blood from all over the body and are like old pains of the wounds, bladder, and kidneys, and heal the flowers; and there are in place at the two shins and ankles, as well as they weaken the entire body after long use, causing lameness and bringing about various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cushion is to place it first when empty and then quickly apply pressure firmly and evenly, without stopping until you see a reddened and swolabler blood vessel appears, and pale streaks of blood: then remove the cushions and pay attention to the condition of the body because there are some that have sensitive skin and open pores; thus it is necessary to puncture only once but make large and deep wounds and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If the wound is thick, it requires striking twice: the first time to make a passage for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very dense, it must be struck a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood bit by bit, we do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we wish to draw much blood, begin frequently; and if the vein is sharp, pierce deeply, so that the crucial points are swiftly punctured, and for those with thick and hard skin, as well as sensitive nerves, apply ointments of oil aperitive and dissolving: if it is violet oil, or almond oil, or seed cucurbite oil; and if it's in a vein, cress oil, lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if for the one you are treating with a tender and broad bandage, do not put any oil on it, but after ventosation with rosewater, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd juice, or pearl ash solution, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should rise easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those with large swellings rise from old wine, or elderberry water, or nettle decoction or chamomile infusion, or other similar substances; and they should not be treated with a poultice before or after the bath but an hour or two afterwards; and do not sleep after ventosation, and it is necessary that they bathe when they need to be vented.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And beware if one who is affected by colic feels too hot and inflamed; it is necessary to prescribe things cold, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces raw, and similar foods; almond milk, horse cheese, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And for those with a cold complexion, they should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, and small portions of food; fish fryers, pigeons, and small birds; on the day he fasts, he must drink more than eat; and it is good to give some people triaicle or musk before ventosation, or after, to comfort the main members; be careful not to overcool them, but only those who are hot should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are placed without causing injury are those put on the liver, and spleen, and gouty swelling, and abdomen, hips, and legs, because this member cannot be injured anywhere, and it is done only to draw blood from one part of a limb to another, as we apply them to nipples when they are not healing; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the abdamain or pelvis to reduce the limb size; and it relieves pain when there is inflammation or stones, possibly drawing out inflammation through its attractive power by chance, or removes the stone from its place; and in this way, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained gasness, and these suction cups are arranged empty to be filled as much as necessary; and at no time are they combined with fire, and at times flat with water, like in diseases of excessive weeping, and in such a way that the suction cup is filled with hot water or water that has been boiled with beneficial herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form for administering a cauterizing agent is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should have two pieces each half the width of a palm, and around them a narrow opening like for pushing in a needle, made of glass or iron, so that it does not slip on placing over the limb; and between them a transverse rod of glass or iron to hold a candle, with large and small sizes according to the diseases and condition of those who use them; because children's blisters are different from old people's, and thinner than fatter ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this is how you put the blister over the limb: take a candle of wax or anointment and place it inside the blister across the rod which is within the blister, so that its light does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, with the two pieces as we have mentioned earlier, and when you want to, release the vapor, and remove the blister. Then take the anointment again as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the cupping that is used for pleurisy, it has neither penis nor glands and is arranged solely when full of water, and it is placed on the limb completely. And this is how it works:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without cupping is used for areas where one cannot place cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in the cases of hairs plucked from the skin like dirt or dandruff, and other similar things; and the quality of use is that when you find cupping spots filled with gentle clear fluids without impurebut take them; and put a nut (cup) on the fluid until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies. Then draw blood from the cup, soak it with fresh water, then rub the area until it turns red, and place cups; when they are full and sink into the skin, if there is a spot where you can apply a cupping technique, do so because this brings great relief.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, raise the dislocation with ease and then anoint it abundantly, very well, and then press it; if it heals too soon on its own without adhering to the body, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply until inflamed areas are cooled down; and if there are multiple instances of dislocation, apply crushed vitriol or gauze until they are reduced, along with similar treatments; or place half a leek on the affected area, leave it until they harden to the bone, which will now heal; and if you need more, take additional bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the dislocations do not take hold, rub the bone with fresh blood or insert a needle until they are reduced, and then apply; as soon as they feel the blood, let them harden; and when you see that they begin to move, sprinkle some powdered aloe and sesame mixed together, or ash, so it will solidify now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn, O scholarly student, that the foolish physician delves into this chapter, having never seen it in any ancient books nor read letters about it; and hence the knowledge is foreign to our land, for I have found no good examples; and I know nothing, save by the knowledge of ancient books wherein I have studied so much as to master its contents, and through experimentation, and by the custom of my life; and here in this chapter I have described what it contains, abridged at the end, clearly showing the forms of treatments that are performed, as demonstrated in these two chapters preceding.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary therefore that we say here the preface of this book containing the essence and chapters in which the sage applies his understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fractures or dislocatures or torsions or quasseur occur in any, it is proper to strengthen the patient on one side and the other, unless nothing can be done; as if by weakness of limbs, or children, or old men; or if the weather is not very cold, or too warm. Also avoid chilly foods such as cold meat, and eggs and poultry fat, do not drink wine nor eat any rich meats, and do not fill yourself up with blood-filled meats until you are certain there is no hot abscess or spontaneous discharge of matter in the limb; then it will soon return to its former proper governance that the patient has previously used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote nourishment, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, barley, sheep's stomach, eggs, fresh fish, rich wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For proper nourishment allows for faster healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that old and decrepit bones cannot be well mended or joined according to their nature for the strength of limbs, nor those also who are too tender, like children's bones; but pay no attention, reset with strong tenons that hold together the member as a whole, until it is strengthened as if it were beforehand; and do not rush through your work, and therefore you must nourish them with fatty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a head fracture is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that occur from dislocation, and others by being bent, as with the breaking of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a crack throughout a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each condition has its own device and instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings forth at the moment; and it is known that bone breaks when the ends are twisted badly and opened widely, and protruding from a hand grip; and when there is no twisting or touching the point, and the patient does not feel great pain unless there is a break. But it can still have twists, splits, or minor fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	the in sone de pru;
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 Know that the fracture which is in tilt, and are two parts disjointed, they must now be set equally straight, as with abscesses if they come; and if the abscess clears, leave it alone for so long as the abscess is pacified; then set it evenly to movements that can be made easily and healthily, knowing that the restoration of it is easier than those where there are missing pieces; then strain, as it must hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone there are broken pieces, when they extend to two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or to your hand where it is small members, or to two strings, or one string and your hand; set the member according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reattach them by all means in their places to movements that can be made easily, and ensure through your work no injury or pain comes upon the patient; and align the two ends of the bone well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well in the hand if you think it does not seem to be properly aligned: dress it neatly and do not extract too much, nor press as those who bring forth pus and contraction of the limb through their technique have often seen us witness.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is at a standstill, chastise it well so that you do not move it, whether awake or asleep, turning, or in any other manner; and ensure the limb is securely positioned so it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, then it is not at a standstill, and you must place it in partial rest so that it does not feel any pain; and ensure that it is placed straightly, avoiding any twisting once restored; the quality of the injured limb follows what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Seek knowledge that broken limbs vary in minor and major ways, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small members like arms and legs, similar ones: you should wrap them with soft linen cloths; for larger parts such as thighs and legs: they must be wrapped in wide and sturdy bandages so that the entire large member is embraced equally, without any unevenness; then place light padding around three or four times according to the size of the limb, grip it with a little pressure along the whole bandage, then go above the break and apply less tension as you move away from the fracture; gradually loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp a significant part of the healthy bone, then take another bandage and return to the original position over the broken area; then come back to the area below the fracture, applying moderate tension neither too hard nor too lightly as we have mentioned in our first point above; then place evenly spaced estuches (small cushions) between the linen or cloth wraps until they are all uniform, and finally wrap it with a wide bandage.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a healing poultice to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days; then dress with sterile gauze of one-inch width or wood shavings used in making slivers, or palm fibers, following this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 However, it is necessary that the splint placed on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others; it should also be as long as needed for small or large limbs. Then dress with bandages in the same way as you did initially, then above a flexible twine immediately following the initial splinting of the fracture; narrower is stronger; and the thread must be medium, not too thick nor too thin, made from flax linen; for if the threads are too thick, like with the cordage used by peasants who make their rope lines from twisted flax, it causes great error, as the splint cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the head of an extremity after it has been tightened into its proper place, then apply linen or cotton padding under them so they do not slip.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, I will describe the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember that it is not necessary to extract all fractured bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limbs are large, one must not put in splints unless after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the risk of an abscess occurring; and here is how ancient masters restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that adheres to the walls of a millstone, mix with abundant egg, and make this concoction neither too clear nor too thick, using it as a common method for splints restoring broken bones in various positions, especially in women and young children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take abareis (sandalwood) and ladani (lemon balm), ana .x. Z.; mirre (myrrh) and aloes, ana .v. Z.; alechil (aloe vera gel), viij. З.; and grind it into powder, mixing with abundant egg; if the patient's condition is warm, use this plaster as it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another method of splinting for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood at 13°; myrrh and aloes at 27°; acacia at 24°; balm-herb and Armenian turpentine at 15°, grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method for treating dislocated joints and displaced bones is to return them to their proper places, alleviating the pain that occurs, trimming of the bone, and fracture: take new bandages, and the wool soaked in oil and cooked, and apply it above.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These dressings do not restore, but are beneficial for cooling of abscesses and properly soothing the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for bandaging broken bones: take dried mulberry leaves and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a splint with them.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method for dressing to restore bone fractures and ease remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, barley flour in equal parts; grind it and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply the mixture mixed with wet coriander water or just water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to treat more effectively than the first, when an abscess comes with member restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of valerian and flaxseed, balm, mallowsweet, horehound, and boneset, and flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal parts; grind them up, and soak with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the member's heat and rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not place anything above the broken limb to promote healing except a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests placing dry and slightly warm substances on the broken limb to promote healing, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plaster for pain and swelling: take horsehair, goat wool, olive pith, and sea sponge in equal amounts, and grind them all together, then mix with the paste.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then apply it briefly afterward, and ensure the patient does not feel any pain or has a dislocated bone in place; if you delay too long and pain comes to the spot, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling occurs, hurry up and reset it quickly, and remove the poultice at once; then take a light cloth, a moist sea sponge, and immerse it in water, and lift the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, and place dry linen (either dampened with water or oil roses), and bind it above a nut (small wooden piece) as long as you are sure of heat abscess; and rest until inflammation subsides on the limb, and pain is relieved, then resume gentle resetting and applying some poultice, but not too forcefully as before; keep refining till it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and painful and swollen throughout the limb, and you need opium and ligature, then proceed as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If it does not come to the member as we have said, do not reset until after III days or IIII or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days according to what is observed, as long as the breaker feels pain and approaches the joint above; then you securely reset more firmly than before, and encourage fleshing of the flesh, as I have said previously; and if you see the wound drying too much when necessary, know that no healing can come; so give it warm water frequently whenever you reset, every day and cleanse gently; in this way, healing comes to the member, and accelerates what skilled surgeons do, who restore the limb correctly: it is unwise, and these are fearful techniques, and I see nothing else but tiredness and proper work.
des diverses manieres de brisure	In various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many ways of fractures and various shapes, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by sword blows, wherein the bone is completely broken up to the joint above it, as made with an axe or club; and thus this manner of fracture is called "hatchure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword splits the bone from above and it is called this kind of break "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, or split or crack of stone-like bone, or falling on stone, or other such things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is persistent bleeding, which reaches up to the tela under the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound healed so subtly into the bone like fine hairs, and it is a small split, thus this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound occurs from being pierced by an arrow, or falling, or similar things, wherein part of the bone enters inside, and the hollows are as in a blacksmith's when they hammer on anvils; and within the iron.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often in those with moist bones, like the skull of an infant; and occurs in all kinds of fractures where small pieces become separated as such; and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures by distraction upon them, and examination with probes, and through the corrupted cartilage that is beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of hair is known by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed well over it; thus there appears black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a breakage, beware if any unfortunate incident occurs with the patient; and if you see no evil event like vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, palpitations, fever ague, eyes exiting forcefully and reddening, and other such manifestations in various dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no hopeless incident, and expect a remedy, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone by the fourteenth day when the moon can be seen.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone by the seventh day before the fleshing around the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the bone fracture reaches near the cloth covering the brain, you must split the affected part thusly; and then extract the piece that hurts the patient, exposing all aspects of the bone as possible. If bleeding occurs upon revealing the bone or an abscess appears, seek assistance with what is appropriate for such cases, ensebut first fill the area around the wound with linen soaked in oil; then let the wound rest until inflammation subsides and you are confident of ceasing blood flow. Then begin to remove any remnants near the bone using two methods: one method is by splitting the narrow part at the front, which is typical for this type of procedure.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have various splints of different lengths and widths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed or made of iron wire; in a light piece of workmanship, do not cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, it must be that you pierce around it, so that you provide splints with tongs, not too long for them to penetrate beyond the bone of the forehead; there should have above the tip a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you shall need several, so that each one reaches the surface area of the beam, providing tongs for all types of tests; this is the form of the three kinds of tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the fractured bone is that you put one tongs on the bone, and turn your two fingers such that you know the bone has been penetruted; then move the tongs a little bit afterwards to do so throughout, then cut out with incisions the space of the bone which is between the percutures, doing so as subtly as you can, gently, as we have said, until you take off the bone by your hand or any of the tools that you use as pincers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and drawn, it is necessary to repair the readiness which has been disturbed by the bone from all other instruments similar to a chisel; but it must be more delicate and finer than the other chisel; and if there are no small bones or scales remaining, gently with the dressings as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of operation is what the Greeks call it, which is more effective; and this requires a strong will, as they say.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the break is most open. Once you have exposed that part, place the pointed end of this lenticular chisel on it as follows.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut one side, and the area is numb in two ribs, so that the cutting tool is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, to chop lightly around the bone entirely, but be sure of guarding from the skin below it; if it's loosened near the beak, gently extract the bone because you can harm it significantly and fearfully.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin and the bone is cut slightly above it so that there are small pieces, then you should treat the severity accordingly, and remove scales with a fine razor of which you must have various quantities in order to administer at each place what is most beneficial according to the work done and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have many coarse razors and finer ones after that, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and fine fractures, it is necessary to administer according to its directionality; and this is something that cannot be easily corrected by those who have put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the scab is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen bandage according to the size of the wound and moisten with oil roseate, then place it over the wound; then take another linen bandage folded in two or three layers, moistened with wine and oil roseate, and place it above the first bandage; do this as gently as possible so you don't burden the sore, then apply medicines on top of it, without pulling too hard until only the wound is touched; leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess swelling is eased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, bread crumbs, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; from these substances make a fine powder, place over the w지르, and apply more medicinal mixtures without stinging; ensure that the wound remains clean, so you don't leave ointment or cause any swelling, as when bowel matter accumulates on the linen covering the brain, it hardens and becomes solid, leading to great harm to the patient, for when something mordant is placed on the sore, nerves become inflamed.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore be cautious; if by chance something happens to the patient as we have said, it is uncertain and without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if darkness comes due to the medicine applied on it, ensuring its power, you must take a part of honey, three parts rose oil and one piece of silk cloth, and apply it over the swelling; then treat as necessary until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	He says that the two upper parts are not broken because they are bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, so it does not break but only swell or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must sew your small finger or thumb and place the break inside your index finger, through to the palm side, until it heals according to its natural shape; do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee and cannot bring the foot to its place, it should be set level with a thin stick slightly thicker than usual.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, do it again similarly, and aim to restore within the first day if possible; if not, after seven or later days when the swelling calms down, then stitch the nail edges with linen thread, if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another from a different side, if there is a breakage; and the sinews are so thick that they fill the joints to no avail.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some healers say you must grind down the stings with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems to me not entirely good, but it is necessary that they be ground into a mixture of egg yolk and flour, then leave the sting, until the bone has healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never apply goose feather quills in place of tendons, and if at all on a thin layer of oil, it will cause the breakage, and suffocate the patient; do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	When an abscess occurs near the eye as you work on it, place beeswax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a drop of diaperin.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there are no abscesses, apply a poultice with wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then place on light gauze, not to be tied too tightly; if the bone fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them with suitable emeryments, then cut open, and treat various uncommon wounds such as char and burns using appropriate plasters and ointments for this case; and if there are no injuries within the joint, treat it with poultices, and apply compresses of linen until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	For dislocation of the jawbone.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there are no wounds nearby, and the fractures are minimal, so that it's not broken in two, but rather splintered within, if one can notice this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	by so ous f that the mertir claudi.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced on two sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension on both parts.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or rotation, use a thread of gold or silver or silk to bind them; then place cerotage on the fractured jawbone and cover it with two layers of cloth; over the cloth, place a large well-made iron bar or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the size of the mandible, and secure it where you can move it. Instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, reposition it daily and then return to its original state; place a poultice on top, with powdered herbs or meal flour after removing the cerotamoil cover; apply a light linen over the poultice, and as long as the poultice is effective and the patient's condition remains unchanged, leave it until healed; many times it has been cured in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, arrange as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no bone fragment has been broken off; delicately remove any splinters of the fragments with what we have said many times before.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it as necessary according to your discretion.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have set all the bones in place and they do not move out of position, if the wound is wide, cover with one or two bandages to support healing until it has fully mended.
de la forcele	To strengthen and fortify.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture often occurs before the shoulder and breaks in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two parts, with fragments, and is easier to restore; or there is a break with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when there is a fracture without an open wound, so that you have two assistants, one who paints the broken joint with strengthening ointment; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then aligns the fracture to your hands so that the form is as it should be, with no appearance or lopsidedness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, then place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or woolling, and it should be thick according to your necessity; and extend and lift the fractured limb, holding the rod in your hand, aligning the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the fractured limb towards the back because it comes out frontwards, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their stomach, and place half an earthenware pot under the shoulder, with the assistants lifting the shoulder while keeping pressure until the bone in the fractured limb rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture of your legs, and if you find debris therein, it is necessary that you cut above; remove the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any splinting, use one of the knives you have chosen for this purpose: to protect against infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 It appears like a spoon and is not pointed; it should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the hand, with two ends: one wider and the other narrower, similar to the shape of the wound made when you tore through the bones during surgery. When you are sure of a hot abscess, cut open the wound; if it is small or you suspect an abscess is still warm, close the wound with linens and bandages according to its amount.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	When abscesses occur there, apply a cloth soaked in oil with roselle and spices, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The pulling of the bone when it feels pain and is tender, place on the bcu placate powder made from finely ground molasses and lamb fat, add light poultices over this, then take a large band about one palm wide, put double gauze under the poultice, along with the plaster; then take a thin bar of III inches wide and lengthy, wrap it around that band so the head of the band hangs, then place the bar above the fracture, turn the band over the neck and atop both legs (the healthy one too), and as you see the ligatures holding onto the fracture firmly, and clearly not moving downwards on the bone each day, keep them tied; when the ligatures loosen, re-tie them. Lay the patient on their back, and place under the shoulder while they sleep I small pillow to lift it upwards; this will ease the pain of the fracture through aligning the shoulders, or if you tie the arm to the neck without any bad accident happening, until XX days are over; then reapply plaster, if needed, and keep the bandages on as such until fully healed; and it is usually restored in no more than XXVIII days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of a shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Sometimes the shoulder is broken or dislocated and cannot be moved at all, and it should not be forced by touch; if you set it according to the pattern of the breakage, and align the joint naturally in every possible way; then put over the location powdered mill fine with abundant oil, and light padding, and place a double layer beneath; then place a wide and subtle bar, slightly wider than the shoulder, and from under this bar, attach ligaments at any point of the shoulder so that they are cut equally; and then tie it all together tightly with a large band so that the bar does not move from its place, and observe each connection daily; whenever there is discomfort, retighten and ensure the bar remains properly in place, and let the patient rest on his side; after a certain number of days (XX or XXV), then release it, being cautious because it is not bone that can be easily reinforced.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes but not from the skin, and it becomes swolebed, and there is inflammation, then follow what we have said in the treatment for an abscess to relieve discomfort quickly.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture of the thigh bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The fish is sometimes broken inside, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks upon being overcooked.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken inside, if it leans to one side, the patient feels great pain, weakness, heat, and perhaps vomits blood, with fractures in the bones that have been shattered, and he feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The process of healing involves the patient lying down on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulder blades, pressing the shoulders, and bringing together the two ribs with your hands, carefully aligning all possible ways until the bone's appearance is correct; then place splints and padding over the fractured area delicately with salt or other light substance, wrap it in a sheet, secure it so it does not move, and return the ligament to its round shape on the back gently, allowing time for recovery each hour, and if it softens, continue to strain; and if it must be dislocated due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, do so quickly, remove it, scrape off the padding, and apply remedies of cure as needed; then reassemble the splint and maintain pressure until healed.
de la brisure des costes	For a broken rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	For the broken ribs are fractures infection and can be infected with d’as heal les chiers that have been bones, so doivent les fracture lesse que li la tes osteoies which become; et ils ou lee a bone les fractures de liaux.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the mending is such that you make the break equal as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then apply a cast, and use a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is moving inward, and it causes the patient great pain and pressure like pleurisy, because the bone pierces; and also lameness, and he vomits a large amount of blood, and this is grievous health, and the ancients have given great remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And some say it is proper to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push out the breach.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make it so that abscesses are formed within if they have not come already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If it has occurred there, if the joint is healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say of these that one applies cups to the place, to draw out humors abundantly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt as to whether the cups do not attract excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say of these that one should cover the area with moist linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to achieve equal pressure all around; then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, flesh, and medicines.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured due to the bone protruding through the skin, and there is doubt in them, then it must be decided to open up at the location of the broken rib, and one should use an instrument to protect against syphilis; thus, you must cut the bone and gently extract it, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with casts until sane.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess occurs, put it on moistened woolen cloths soaked in oil rose, and place them over the area; treat while keeping the area as required for an abscess, until he lies curled up on his side where it needs to be, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	From the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	At no time does fracture occur in the bones of the neck, and it is rare for them to bow; similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, watch carefully if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel them.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that they are dead in various positions, and if you move them and they feel well when restrained but not moved, know that the bone's joint is preserved, and the patient will be healed if treated accordingly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 If such things come to the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is sane or not, be cautious if the joints are softened, and if there are injuries that have occurred in them, and on the back jump windiness and egestion without desire; and when it has been soved over its belly, it jumps egestion without desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it has been soved on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Says that they are fatal: do not work in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply ointment if there is an abscess, using rose oil or almond oil until it's soothed; then place it under a comforting and drying plaster and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, you must apply heat to the area; then separate the two edges of the wound if it's large and stitch them together; then dress the wound with a healing ointment until it's healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as 'the hip joint,' place your poultice from your left hand to the right one in balance, then apply a plaster and bandage if needed; then bind it, and if there are dislocated bones, put them back, stitch the wound, and treat it until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of broken bone of the hip joint
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often the bone of the hip joint is broken, and if it happens, there should be a slight thinning at the head; they become elongated, incline towards the pelvis, come to the patient with pain at that spot, swelling, and fracturing.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you are above the fracture; and identify what the break and its shape are; and if the fracture is solely in the head, then align this fracture to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	;ta are and and: If you c.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it evenly, then place under a board, and then under a post of wood or metal, and stabilize the breakage so that it does not move, and align the upper part from below the ribs until they are level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes forth, do not touch it until the abscess is soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and bind as needed, unless there has been any additional injury; this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which lies between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it should be repaired in one of two ways: one is to take a plain iron rod as large as needed.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And attach two heads to it with two cords and hang the patient under one of them; then pour some boiled beef broth over the broken limb on the rod until it comes up to his elbow, and let there be a curve in the rod, then suspend it from any heavy object or extenders; then place the mire at the fracture equal with both hands together, until the fracture is set as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	; that theird; set sal the by; or d thembobint ou tue en lesse sulittelle est this is they.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is further out, restrain the sinew below the break, and above the break, and stretch each muscle to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 If the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, you must place a tie under the axilla and another one towards the buttock, below the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the buttock, it should be gently tied with little effort until the fracture is equal on both sides at its location, and also along the buttock; then align the fracture as needed, and bandage it, unless an abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not hold it until six days have passed; instead, apply linen soaked in ease and oil of roses to the area as long as the abscess is calmed; then reset it, setting a splint over the fracture, reassembling the arm on the shoulder blade, placing your hand on the shoulder or breast. Wrap the bandage tightly around the joint and arm, ensuring that the arm remains still if nothing prevents it or if no bones are displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the bone is not moving, use splints and place a larger and stronger than the others, and between each of them have two thirds parts; then re-splint, so at the fracture. Place on top, more strongly as I said in the beginning below it breaks, above less strong and thupeau au chapiste si estrain sus les briseur, la peirrebrisqulz et siznauet de l’apres mires le chouse aloignet paralent oultre que les brisure enlange.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 If you see the site of the fractures and strains as we have said, in the hour when you restore the broken limb, and if you doubt whether an abscess is hot, leave it loosely tied until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days to ensure no swelling or inflammation occurs at the site, or that any bruising does not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 If no such accidents occur, then the dislocation should not be reset for more than three days or so, and let the patient lie on their back with hands resting on their stomach; and place an equal length of plain linen under the shoulder joint, and watch each hour during the day or night to ensure that the injured limb does not move or soften the ligaments. If necessary by the virtue of medicine, provide them with food as we have previously advised, in such a way that the food is mild; and when they begin to recover, it should be substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is usual for the shoulder and leg to be reset in forty days altogether; and then one should dislocate them again and administer baths and ointments to straighten the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is ugly and swollen, it remains dislocated for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	For a broken arm fracture
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called "foscile," one small, which supports the elbow, and one large, located below the little finger; sometimes the large one is broken solecuously or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small vessels are broken, restoration is easy, and healing; but when large vessels are broken, then the healing is bad, more painful than when they are all together broken.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only small vessels that are broken, then the treatment requires slight extension and balancing.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it's large vessels that are broken, then the treatment requires stronger extension; extend using supports, and raise the sleeve of the hand higher than others, while lowering small fingers compared to other fingers, cross both hands over each other near the same spot, with one support placed in front of them higher so as not to cause any discomfort to the patient; then extend the supporting straps on either side of the area below their hand or wrist.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the mirror evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each one back to its position, and if any are dislocated that grip the bone, and you cannot restore it to its position, then strike above and cut the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the wound of injury, I have spoken to the individual practitioner; he shall take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And at the beginning of restoration, if boils arise, then use a wrap made of clay and white wax oil mixture, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; gently apply the wrap over all the boils until they are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then apply the clay wrap and place the plaster with plenty of heat, making it slightly larger than the others; ensure there are VI stakes or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and strain more above the fracture site than other areas. Do not move much on a daily basis as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. The bandages that are over the fracture should be soft and moist, neither too rough nor hard; use linen threads for binding, not too thick or thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And repair the limb and ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes upon the limb, you must bathe the limb in warm water until the itchiness is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones set right, along with similar things, so it is.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and let it rest for some time until the swelling subsides, then resume binding.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not loosen until X days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 Or if he does not improve, then bind his hands to his neck and keep them even; and watch for movement and relapse, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XLV, and possibly in XX days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	He says that on the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few fractures, but they bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is fractured or bent, and if it should come to bandage, then heal properly, and extend his hand outstretched, and the bones broken, and the splints are equal, as long as they grow until joined; and applies plasters, and apostemas, thusly. And thereupon comes in le by the measure is put a lump of; and do so much, it shall come not be measured out for all; and the heals onward.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	When the fracture is around the forepart of the stomach by the foot plant, make a sleeve from cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it tightly at the broken area; then strengthen with a long strip of cloth, and let the knot be as large as the hand's palm, and tighten as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the hind part, it's necessary to place a splint underneath and another above on the plantar side, so that the hand remains exposed and straight; then bind it entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligaments between the two are sealed.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes from either of the bones between them (if it's a spike), place an equal splint as needed; and bind with the plantar side, and whether you see to put a small straight splint to elevate the fracture without moving it. If the fracture is on any other of these bones (like in the index or one of the others), place equal splints and use the healthy adjacent bone for binding; or bind them all together with a single strap, as much movement it allows, or placing a splint if needed. And take care in restoration and abscess treatment, and heal whatever comes out, just as I have said before.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken hip joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip joint is often broken in many ways, and when it turns forward and backward, its restoration involves applying a ligature above or below the fracture.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies face down, then each attendant extends their hands equally on all sides of his body; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be towards the wrist and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And similarly if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee and its extension; then with a mirror place the bone in equal two hands, according to its natural figure, and then place the plaster, without any abscess occurring.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, let it be pacified then return to your work and care; the lanced opening is done in part by method.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary that you wrap above the fracture with a doubled bandage in two or three layers and leave some excess; then rotate the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and put a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee; let the top end of the thread reach upwards; then rotate above the leg and above the hip with the bandage, then place an upright at the fracture site and another on the leg bone; then tie off the remaining space between the leg and the hip using a softer fabric to ensure even tensioning; start making three or four turns around the fracture. The more you tighten near the fracture, the less it is strained. Then go back to the two ears of thread that were put between the leg and the hip, and remove three uprights above them, then return to below the top end of the thread until you reach the foot; if it does not move from its place, leave it as such; otherwise do nothing else or don't let any abscesses or swellings occur.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that it dislocates again, and address what is happening as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, then they must be pushed back in if possible, but if not, one can split the flesh, and extract the fragments; and the treatment should be done as we have described until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the thigh broken as when one inserts pegs, such as in the shoulder and arm; however, with healing done this way, it does not alleviate the patient's suffering.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one or two days, or a little more or less, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the hollow of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 It is said that in the glen of the neck there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if broken, it is not so much a crack or piercing, but occurs in all wounds, and causes pain, and feels very unwell.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing process involves setting it as equally balanced as possible with its parts moved so they can be assembled; then apply the splint, and if needed, put on a round board, and secure firmly as necessary, then address all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, such as swelling and similar issues; apply to each accident what is suitable for it until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Concerning the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 It is said that in the leg there are two bones; one called 'right' and the other called 'femur'; and all types of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and thus the treatment is similar to that of the arm entirely, and the procedures apply to both. And if the two bones break together, the leg turns at every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is shattered, then turn to face forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen clearly; and it appears bent out of shape.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then make the reduction and align it properly, and secure the fragments evenly; but always, ensure there is no unsightly fracture, and if there are more pieces, that the reduction be smaller and easier; and apply a splint according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of hemped wood that wrap around the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them securely together so the leg cannot turn left or right, and thus it is well done; and no one should administer a band of wood along the length of the leg if it is made of wood, and properly keep the leg from moving; regularly check for any swelling or other issues in the area of breakage or wound; and cure until healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Regarding the fracture of the bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot a break occurs sometimes and in the shinbone, and nothing happens to cause weakness or other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a break in the bone of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it gently on the ground as if it were going to walk, then immediately put your own foot under its, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and compresses above, and place a small bandage with two plain pins below, over the belly of the affected foot, secure it temporarily, then wrap around with cloths as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you will loosen the ligament, for you will find that the bones are equal again, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any broken bones, then repair them as we have said for the hand; then insert a splint along the length of the limb, and make it slightly wider; then place underneath the foot the table I mentioned, and stretch it immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one individually, placing a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the table beneath the leg so that its top aligns with the stomach.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary not to forget the other things I have said regarding other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each incident accordingly.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman's body is broken, if she lies down with it elevated, then incline her toward the less painful side and support her behind; next fill the wound with cotton from a sick person according to your discretion; then have her stand up gradually, slowly lifting her back until the cotton reaches the entrance of the body and realigns the bone; when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinaturesset it again: do this for seven or eight days: if you look after her properly, the fracture will be healed, and then take a sheepskin bladder, attach an envelope to one end, fill the entire bladder with liquid, blow air into the envelope until the bladder is empty; the wound will close again; then fill it with cotton and leave it as such for several days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the forefinger of the man is broken, or of the woman, be restored as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and use, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For fractures mean various conditions for the right way of restoration: so it is to be understood.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	And of the bones quant les lignons li les bone.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those who have a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, as long as the sinews we mentioned confirm this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, and there remains lead poisoning, unless you have other things, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, as long as abscesses do not appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	; they can. the same:
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the joint, it must be gently set into place with your hands, in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if you cannot set the extension with your hands to be level, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or six branches and is long in length; and its width depends on the quantity of the wound; thus it is necessary for a surgeon that he grips three or four, as needed for each fracture treatment; and let them have hooks and be somewhat thicker so they do not bend under compression to the limb at your workplace, and place them firmly in front, and thick enough forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And called "pallance," for the patient's head must be placed on the visible part of the bone; and it is done once until it returns, and they are level with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly take hold of the bone, then it must be cut off until the splints have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with the aid of an appropriate instrument, whether cutting or sawing, to your ability; then extract that which is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned to its place, if the patient feels great pain afterwards, believe that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If you return it to its place and then moisten the dressing with a stipulative black ointment, and properly so it is in shape; do not apply any cerote or other substance unless there is oil present, otherwise prevent rot and decay from occurrebi; after restoring the bones, leave the wound exposed, cover all around according to the size of the wound, ensuring that you protect well against straining with fractures; many times this has been done by madmen, resulting in death or corrosion at least once; and it should be strung more gently and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that something unforeseen may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it does not require placing a splint; but wrap around it, near the wound, with stiff cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days that pus flows from the wound, remove what you have placed on it, and apply healing salve to the wounds, as with a four-part remedy and similar substances.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes relaxed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be fitted with a splint so that the bow supports it lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if several days pass and it cannot be straightened but continues bent like this, for there are small bone fragments, you must clean the wound with gauze and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if an abscess comes to the area, or another form of decay, it is necessary that you treat it, as described in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, like the hip or shoulder, and other similar large body parts, do not attempt to treat it, for many times death occurs, but leave it until it heals; perhaps it will be expelled by itself after twenty days or thirty, then tend to the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just let it go.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises which arise upon the saddle.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come upon the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and an ugly thing to see is the state of the limb; and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Be careful then if it is fresh: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, pitch, acacia, and other similar things; take any of these items or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or plenty of vineger or honey water; put it in leather pouches, strain it well, and do not untie the knot for days; then reset, and continue to another until the swelling is ossified like bone; or you may be bound with a piece of wood properly shaped; because the property of this piece of wood is that it removes all inflammation from above the limbs; if the swelling has already turned hard as stone, and needs to be removed, then cut away any excess protrusion; or take it to some barber who will pare until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and remains weak after the limb has become frail and delicate for various reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, preventing blood circulation to the limb; or due to a multitude of wounds; or from excessive movements at inappropriate times; or because there is little blood within its body, thus making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is to have the patient eat well and keep their body warm until there are many blood vessels in them again; and administer baths for joy and comfort; then apply plasters on the limb, so that they draw a lot of nourishment into it, and frequently re-wet with water while the circulation restores to the member; and bring back its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	After injury has healed, the limb becomes twisted
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb appears ugly, yet it still retains its natural formation: do not believe the fools who say that you must break the limb anew entirely, as many foolish people have done in our land; these practices are condemned, and they bring great harm and sometimes death. However, if dislocations and tortures are fresh, it is fitting that they be eased with hot water or soft herbs cooked, such as coltsfoot leaves, roots, meadowsweet, and similar things; and prepare a mollifying poultice, like well-made diaquilon, and take the muscatel of coltsfoot, and mix it with pig fat or oil of sesame, and apply the poult지; or take oily figs, and grind them with fennel seeds, and other medicines that soothe swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And at no time is an inflamed bone treated by continuously rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And thus, adjust the position of each limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the curvature is old and hardened, like stones, it needs to be removed with iron, so that it extends up to the bone using a subtle delicate saw-like instrument; then apply pressure and careful attention in its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if necessary now reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if it is delayed, and the inflammation has spread, and when attempting to reset it takes effort; therefore, do not move the limb at the time of inflammebtion: often this causes swelling and other pains; nonetheless, once that occurs, soothe the patient's pain first, then leave them alone until the abscesses are calmed. Then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, gently exercise it, and treat each limb as needed when treatment is required at its location.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	.
des mandibules	Of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Occasionally the jawbones become dislocated and remain so; there are two ways this occurs: either they are slightly out of place but softened a bit, or completely displaced, hanging towards one side, causing saliva from the mouth to not be contained, unable to close their mouth, and wrapping around their tongue when speaking.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocation is slight, it can return on its own in various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is complete and properly done, you must reset the jaw quickly without delay, and in such a way that the ointment touches the patient's head, pouring a little bit of oil from one hand into the root of the mandible dislocation inside the mouth; since the dislocation occurs on both sides. The other two hands should be equal, and instruct the patient to soften their jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And then put it inside of its place until they are balanced equally; and take your right beforehands:
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	If it is difficult to reset, especially if they are the two mandibles together, use hot water and oil, until gently realigning; do not strain in attempting to reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are equally returned, and the patient's mouth feels a significant softening, place them on cloths moistened with a cream made of oil rose and wax, then lightly bind it with fine threads; let the patient lie on their back, and their chin be between two pillows so that they do not move or turn left or right, nor strain to swallow but gently chew meat until pains are gone, and the jaws are thoroughly bathed; then follow what they wish easily, without forcing them to open their mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandibles are well cleansed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and usual complaints may come, and perhaps abdominal issues, or possibly complete vomiting of bile alone.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then say that it is a loss; and often those who experience it die within seven days.
de la forcelle	Of the hernia
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The hernia cannot dislodge from within the ribcage and below, and it is never displaced once formed, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 The restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then press the form of the shoulder with your palm, and it will return; then place a pad and bandage over it, and bind it tightly; and the eye which is towards the pain cannot dislocate. If not, and if it does dislocate even once, reset to its position as we have said; then place another pad and bandage over it, and bind it firmly, and allow the patient to rest until they are healed; likewise, return the shoulder blade when displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 That the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one way where it comes out from the ankle area; another where it comes out at the back of the leg; and occasionally coming out towards the front, which happens rarely; and not backwards nor internally by the nerves; and sometimes dislocates downwards towards the ankle, especially in those with little flesh, as it does so quickly for them; for those with enough flesh, jumps easily and re-enters easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are individuals with blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess; they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then it is necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And the dislocation is known when it goes downward towards the ankle, and there is difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity evident; and at the top of the shoulder, a socket is found, and where the head of the shoulder touches the topside, just like if it were two eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand near himself nor make any movements; and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you can clearly see it when touched; and this kind of dislocation is not only about resetting, especially when a child feels unwell.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the minister to lift the hand of the sick person upward, then place poultices under the joint and raise it forcefully to its place; the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward, placing it down again quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 If it does not come as we have said after several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and be made comfortable with soothing and relaxing methods, like an infusion of althea and fenugreek and millet seed in hot water, and thus prepared; then lay the patient on their back, and under the shoulder insert a strap equal in thickness, not too soft or hard, then place the foot over the strap, gently lift the head of the dislocated shoulder, and treat it with your hand; and other attendants dye the top of the injured person's head, so that it does not move forward; the shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it return according to this method: and have a man present who is larger than the patient; stand straight towards their side, and support the dislocated shoulder underneeby the neck, gently lifting it upwards so that the injured person hangs in the air; and other attendants treat the lower part of the injured person's hand toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 If the patient is too lightweight, accompany them with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the resetting can be done in another manner: and it is as when one drives a long stake into the ground so that the shoulder returns like a pistachio, neither too large nor too thick; then it should be placed under the patient, with fabric for protection above, while the limb remains straight; then their hand is extended to the other side properly, and the joint will return to its place quickly. If it does not want to return despite all these things we have mentioned, do this treatment: take a stake two arm's length long and four palms wide, which has a head that fits for fingers to enter from one end towards the knee, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then wrap the head with a cloth so it does not touch the patient, then place under the saddle where the shoulder is, and extend your arms over the length of the staff, tie the arm to the staff at the top of the hand, then put one arm through the chest strap of a wide saddle pad, with hands facing downward, leaving the body hanging on the other side: the joint will remain in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set in place, however you do so, it must be that you put under the saddle a staff of woolen yarn, then apply a poultice of powdered medicine, with incense and ointment of frankincense on all around the shoulder, then tighten it away from the saddle quickly, and wrap the hand at its neck, leaving hands hanging thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is proper that he rests little while the member becomes comfortable, for it will recover sooner; and then rest more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is firm but not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is forced out due to moisture that caused it or another reason, you must apply three punctures with cautery as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 6 days, and the joint cannot stay in place or lift the arm upward, then understand that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are compressed or stretched out or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be properly placed there.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs in the leg and thigh or behind is caused by impact, extended hands, and another lever; treat until it is set right.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing come tremors in the limb and later movements, the patient uses them many times until those tremors cease, returning to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the knee
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	the S; and a se; This ou tizz que c�C: est they arent; en leur ce ; by.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when joining the patient's joint properly with the healthy one, you should see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as quickly as possible when abscesses occur there, for if they were occurring, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes not at all, especially if it's towards the back; this type of dislocation is worse than others, causes greater pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	The restoration is when it can be repositioned, extend its hand to your two hands; and the arms spread out, and the hands according to the proper position around it, above and below, place the joint back on its peach together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	When dislocation is before, it returns when the hand doubles to itself and the root of the palm's edge that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to its place, give strong extension; and let two ministers extend the arm, tying one end of a long wide cloth around them, then rotate the arm from each side after wrapping with the cloth; and when the point reaches the joint in their hand, anoint any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns; and once it is in place, apply dry embalmment with olive oil paste, stretch strongly, bend the arm near the patient's neck, and leave for some days before releasing.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in its place, then dislocate it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, repeat the splinting and binding, leaving it like this for several days until it is securely set; then dislocate it again.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 If after the repositioning of the joint it feels unstable and moves, then bathe and rub well, applying pressure until soothed; or place a fat sheep grease on the joint, leave for one day and night, then reset, and let them take a bath; when they sweat, promptly rub the joint, then reapply the grease, followed by another bath; repeat this two to three times until healed; if so, apply moist whey cheese warmed with butter, and strain it on.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand joint occurs, and its return is light compared to other joints generally; it must be quickly returned to its place at the same time as it becomes dislocated again, so that swelling or pus does not occur therein.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The repositioning is done by placing the patient's hand on a table, extending their fingers, and aligning them so that they place their palm over the joint area, pressing until it returns to its normal shape; then you must check if it has been properly placed; thus, position the patient'lete back onto a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 If the dislocation is on the back of the hand, make the patient place their hand's back against a table, and let the doctor position their hand under the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, that is good; if not, apply a soothing paste and leave as such until comfort resumes.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if it cannot be endured and you are unable to reset after any number of days, the joint remains twisted; nor does anything help other than when the hand becomes muddy and cannot grasp anything at all: then tell that the nerves or arteries are cut, as there is no other remedy but to try with a cautery near the base, which may not be effective.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, place them on the platform as we have said, then grasp and leave for 5 days, then release and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they cannot move well, and there is no trembling, then apply warm water with millet, and rub until it feels fine.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocation of the hand's fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Never are the two of the hand dislocated to each side, never from the back of the palm or belly; then they are dislocated, and push them into place until it recedes, then support the head of the joint, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed; leave it for three days, then make it even on that day; afterwards bind it, as we have said, with a daily ligature, and loosen the ligature, allowing movement, then tie it again; do this often until tightened, and do likewise if it is dislocated from the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until made straight; and do likewise when dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	For the dislocation of the spinal column in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spinal column or the neck is dislocated, if there are multiple occurrences and no remedy, it quickly kills the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 The evacuations occur without consent, cannot be held in place, and often softens any member, such as both thighs or one arm or the other; many times the spine moves to four parts; when it shifts towards the back it is called "gilbosity": treatment involves addressing if gilbosity has its origin in childhood; there will be no cure or healing at all otherwise.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that come from falling or impacts or similar things, say the ancient methods of treatment with grand words have no great benefit at all; but I've shortened it according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 In the gilbosity that arises on the chest front, there is no remedy or health; and similarly to those occurring directly in the sides, which cannot be cured except for those precisely coming onto the back, as I say; and it should be that the patient lies stretched on their face with one leg equal, having strain below them so they do not bend over; then insert a stick into the head of earth firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a band around the lower legs of the afflicted, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two assistants know the bands, one on the head and one on the feet, among the sticks; and they are well secured, as we have said, and the master places his palms firmly onto the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If it does not return with this treatment, take a tablet three fingers long, and chevron the head from under the appearance (of joint), positioning the patient on their side, then lower the head of the tablet beneath the appearance, place the middle of the tablet over the spine; arrange the feet of the staff on the other end of the tablet, and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see so, make a windlass that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you shall insert two pins at the head of the large arm, and towards the other two feet, with between each pin an elongated space; there should be one hole per pin for turning, making them firmly set in place so they do not move; and between every two pins have a returning pin, where the ligaments return, and in these returns, have two small pins of length equivalent to a palm, to turn the windlass; then bind the ligament that is among the joints with the windlass at its head, and the other ligament towards the feet on the other windlass, making each assistant turn their own winch, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are equal, place a dry suction cup with an abundance of oil, then the stoppers, then the sharpening of a tablet three fingers thick, to properly align the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine; then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the sickly until they are healed; and if any thing comes in at the end of their health, give medicines that soften and soothe, using the sharpening we have mentioned before this; never once administer a piece of lead, nor does an appearance come to the rear spine, and one thinks it is dislocation; but it is the bone cracking, hence there should be no presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocation of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is said that hip and shoulder joints only come with dislocations, not as other joints do; the hip joint can be dislocated in four parts: anteriorly, posteriorly, internally, and externally; more often it comes out internally, less so frontwards and backwards.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and exposes more bone ends on the sick than the healthy, and the sick cannot double their hip socket in fire; and are legs that swell near a hot abscess, because the knee head comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those for whom it occurs is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who suffer before it, are such that they extend their leg according to completion; however, do not double the knee in pain, and if one wishes them to walk, they cannot bend forward, retains urine, swells with anger, and as they walk, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for those who suffer behind it are such that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, anger is alleviated, and the head of the hip to its place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The signs of this type of dislocation are such that you must know if the dislocation has occurred before, and it remains according to its condition, there is no treatment; and in no way should it have arrogance.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	When the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating, quickly return the joint to its place, push it in and out, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must strongly bind the limb with two hands or a tie over its hip socket; another method involves extending one's hand above so that they place their hands under their shoulders and pull tightly on a light tie at the hip; another ties the head to the tie; and all extend upwards and downwards once, until the injured is lifted off the ground once, then it hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for 4 types, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, then attend to its appearance when the dislocation is in the jawbone, it must be guided by supporting the patient on their good side, then place a bandage at the root of the hip, and the displaced part that is under the rib, extend the bandage upwards towards the ribs, and towards the collarbone; then enlist other assistants for its arms, and embrace the large protruding part of the affected hip, and extend it outward properly: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage above the heels and on both knees, and let the affected leg be extended two inches more than the other; then hang them from their head using a pole, and arms outstretched for long lengths; then command one assistant to embrace the pelvis, while others are hanging with the patient, who properly embrace the pelvis, as the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 When the dislocation is not in use, gently touches the patient as with those having sprains, and properly stretches near the affected limb and joints; then apply ties at the head and other places; then insert a tine between the buttocks towards the malady's location; also surround it with moistened cloth so it doesn't move, then stretch each minister outwards from him, and the mire aligns equally to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is well.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place on a board and press as we have said with sprains, and touch the patient near the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be stretched out hastily with the injured leg, and according to what I have said; place your hands on their painful side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is in place, it should not extend the patient's arm or lift it off the ground, but instead let it lie as a hinge would have been dislocated behind; and lay on its face, with the limb extended as we have said at lying on two pillows; then apply pressure to the joint against the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, which should be even; then support the buttocks, place the heating-iron, and tighten a bandage so that the hinge does not move; and rest for three or four days before removing it; and place the heating-iron again above. And if you see them to be even, then tighten the bandage as before, and leave it for three days; then allow the patient to walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joints are dislocated in three ways: through pressure from within and behind; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg towards his hip, and if it does not reach its hip, know that it is dislocated; and in all cases of restoration, ensure the patient sits upright, extends his leg as much as possible, and places his back on his thighs, with his foot under your feet; then take his heel in your palms, pull apart between your thumbs, then bend both sides of the heel thoroughly; other assistants extend his foot until the knee joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it gently touches its hip; apply a poultice there, then bandage the leg to the thigh, keeping them tightly together for 3 or 4 days, then release. And do not let the patient walk while the limb is still unstable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not much affected, it must be firmly supported strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the elbow, until it becomes well-aligned.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes numb, never fully dislocated, within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and try before reaching the part where it was dislocated: repositioning should be light, and extend gently with your hands when only slightly touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and support them mainly with their leg, above the ancułe; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice with your left hand, then lift upwards, and gently place the foot on top; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start the process again because it will return; and if it cannot be returned like this, make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, and securely insert a stick between their thighs to prevent movement of the body; then press the stick against the buttocks, and with other attendants extend the foot towards them or by its ligaments that it lies under the neck of the foot; then equally extend all attendants, and let the stick remain between the patient's thighs to keep the body still when extended; then place mirrors symmetrically on both sides of the dislocation with their hands, and other attendants pull the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it has reached its endpoint, apply the dressing and packs on top, stretch firmly, and tie the bandage around the leg, and watch for nerves located behind the ankle, so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding softens, retension the wound; then release at the third day or a quarter of one, preventing the patient from moving by four days; and if they progress beyond this period, it is not without concern that it may dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes there, one must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	From the shoulder dislocation and its treatment, let's discuss a few related matters:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	by;t what d. If:
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it must be made to sit straight on a level surface or table, and place your foot under where these joints are affected, then press firmly with your foot; do so until it returns; and when they are aligned properly, and there is nothing wrong, put a board beneath the sole of the foot, then retension firmly, leave for three days, then release, and let them rest until healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	For both wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When wounds come with dislocation and we see them to be healed, many times the patient dies: if you are not confident in the treatment unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are merciful and compassionate and slow to act; do not be rash. Begin with soothing treatments for abscesses hot and leave the sick person in God's hands if there is no hope of health; and when there is hope, reset the limb now as the abscess softens; and once the limb is in place, apply calming remedangs to the abscess, and tend to the wound as needed with dried ointments. And if there is dislocation with bone fractures and small bones come out of place, follow what we have said about simple illnesses; and beware of taking a path of fear according to what I have said, for it will bring you misfortune by your Creator and because of the healthiness of your armor and body.
Amen	 Amen
