O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science knowledge, and I have finished it with its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I have received in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work "of hands," namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is rare in our region and has been taken away entirely, thus the knowledge and practice have perished, leaving only small descriptions from ancient books where hands have worked.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and folly, and minds are closed off, and knowledge is displaced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I shall revive this treatise with the method of exposure and exposition, and abbreviation; and come together the forms of fire cautery instruments and other devices of work with the assistance of declaration and preparing it as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	It is necessary for the one who undertakes it to be well versed in anatomy as Galien says, until he understands the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations thereof, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and vessels and number of veins, and their movement and arteries moving and resting, and the place from which they arise.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates says that without skill one is very little, and with the tool it is a bit more; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one is not aware of the things mentioned, they should beware to not err and cause harm; thus I have wanted many times from those who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	A physician I saw a mad man who cut an abscess of scrofulous glands or neck of a woman, and cut the veins near her throat; thus so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his arms.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another physician treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took out with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called upon to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and it was very certain that he would die when they tried cutting it out.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	Another skilled healer took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture was an open wound. The ignorant physician hastily reset the fracture atop the wound as if it were a splint, leaving no gaping hole in the wound; and he left it thus for some time. He instructed him not to dislocate it again; after which the leg was fully healed, including the foot, before falling into ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hurriedly came undone his leg; and when I saw it dislocated so peacefully, he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But any way the decay was already established in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other mirror which fell an inflamed abscess due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a canker, when it is cleared of black bile humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is partially removed so that all the corrupted matter can be extracted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, those places where there is danger in various arrangements; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Thus, you must take care to prevent the foolish from speaking ill of you; if necessary, wield your weapons with gentleness and firmness, using the best approach so that through God's grace you come to salvation and are praised; and dismiss diseases that give hope for severe health; remove doubts by taking action based on faith in order to transition from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Do not take into care illnesses that would lead you to be called foolish by others.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have devised this treaty according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and medical caustics, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet; and on swelling forms, and metal instruments for cautery, and all that is necessary in practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of tailors and surgeons, and cupping and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and on swelling forms.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is on repositioning dislocations and sprains, and similar things; it is ordered from head to foot and on swelling forms.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember our work, it behooves me to say the quality of the aid and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the remedy and its harm are words spoken longest, subtle science, and secret resolutions; and on this matter the wisest speak, agreeing to it; but their few words do not suffice, for I will recount at length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps universally with any temperament or matter; for there are two temperaments: one being hot and sensitive to matter, and the other dry without sensitivity to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexions both hot and dry combined with matter, some argue that fire cautery is of great help; while others say the opposite: that fire cautery is only useful for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	When the nature of fire is so hot, and it must not be treated with heat from fever or dampness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery greatly helps in treating hot and dry illnesses affecting the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body's condition with its moisture to the temperament of hot fire, you find it cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every way, only those who have tried it and know well the practice of cautery, the variety of human constitutions, their conditions and causes of diseases, as well as outcomes and duration; we do not fear others, especially with cold and damp illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the masters agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	(do; and n're t ça m, but none; f les marjolement Marr:
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The fire is simple, and does not come to harm except the limb which is cooked, and it harms no other member if named so.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines come from one limb to another by merging and bring about severe diseases of health; and sometimes it kills the patient due to its potency and because of the goodness of his substance does not do so unless there is excessive wastefulness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	s the t and:  by a (or.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they are agreed upon when the cauteries should be done, and before praying.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cauterization is suitable at all times, because the damage occurring is removed by the aid of cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for urgent necessary pains which cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	is not par ces; Estrop: a l’est cure per cent.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And among these things is that the disease may come at any time according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature; and there are excesses in him from the acquisition of meats and similar substances, if not administered cauterization where it has little excess and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and other things, so that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last of medicine, and it's true; but they do not believe that cauterization follows medicine, their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last of medicine because when we administer treatments in any illness and they are not effective, then we apply our cauterization, and it does.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then indeed that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the misunderstanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that surgical instruments made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they considered it better solecu due to the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; they also stated that the wounds caused by fire cautery do not cause putrefaction but this is indeed untrue as I have tested and found that in some men it does occur. Surgical instruments made of gold are as effective as those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Nevertheless when you heat the gold instrument, it's not because of its gold color and it cools quickly; if it is overheated too much, it can cause harm by fire; thus there are enough hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use fire cautery as we have proven its usefulness in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This oil cautery is for moisture and cold in the brain; and therein it is done due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head into the eyes, and causing multitude of dreams and toothaches and throat pain, as well as all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and stroke and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	Ca:
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	First make the patient sit with a cross between your hands, and place their hands on both sides of the chest; then put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and where your arms come together, it will bleed afterwards and apply the cautery called "olivare," which is shaped as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place your hand with the mark of ink, and while drawing and straining slightly your fingers back and forth, slowly lift your hand; if you see the bone just a small hole, proceed with the cautery as I have instructed until you can see the bone; afterward, take a little oil, and place soft cotton inside, then place it over the affected area for three days; afterwards, apply fine linen cloth soaked in butter; leave it until the burn is healed; finally, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon," until it is completely healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if said by the ancients that as long as an open wound persists, more pus will be discharged, and therefore help is given accordingly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must thoroughly clean the cautery and if part of the bone is burned, then heal what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must clean the cautery thoroughly, and apply it as strongly as a woman would put padding in her shoes to allow fluids to exit; then let the open wound be lanced for a long time, after which it should be treated and dressed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	These two methods of cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, but rather in certain individuals who are gripped by fear; and it seems to me that I should let them remain; for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witnessed with other limbs; and similarly when the patient's head is naturally feeble, and the first sign of cauterization brings more safety and relief, then in such a case my work seems to be beneficial.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ankle pain comes severe discomfort to the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain in the entire head is chronic and lasts long, patients should use years and pills called "cochie," along with chief purge and oils and plasters; if one performs the caustery we have previously mentioned, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be aware if the patient's shoulder is of a severe condition and not too cold; then caustery should be applied below that caustery we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	.
dou cautere dou chief	For both fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease extends to the ear, and the head is relieved by purging medicines, and other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases have been done but prove futile: then you should perform cauteries according to two methods, that is with aqueous medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with aqueous medicine is that you shall puncture a hole of size about two centimeters, remove the skin and cover it with two or three stitches; then reattach the flap so that you can restore the punctured area underneader the fascia. Once reattached, ensure that it is well strained and left for 12 hours; then untie it and apply a dressing to the wound for two or three days, and cover with clean gauze moistened with butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is cleaned; and if you see, take some of the written or dosage treatments for burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery of iron is as follows in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the fire cautery which has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the top is made in the shape of a clover or has .i. horns on it and at the middle there's a small opening; place it over the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron slightly until half the thickness that touches the skin turns red; then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn further back, allowing an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellaris," do so at the tip, and be careful not to cauterize the artery in this migraine which is not an old one.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migrahren as we have previously mentioned in divisions of diseases, and it does not improve with the previous medicine using fire or iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellaris" until it is white; and place your hand on the sore spot for a line half an hour long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not puncture the artery nor damage up to the bone. Be careful with jaw movement when eating, and ensure nerves maintain their direction without causing spasms in patients or fear upon cauterization of the artery; also be wary of blood discharge from the artery once it is punctured. However, I will explain how to stop bleeding after an artery has been punctured and show where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this cautery does not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering greatly, perform the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery we have discussed or extraction from the artery with a cautery that has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from coldness and one has applied soothing medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pains do not cease, then cool with this cautery called 'points', which has the following shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing around the entire ear, where either of them holds pain in both, and moving slightly up from the root of the ear once you have located it; and give six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Regarding the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be treated by cauterization is only those caused by humidity, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on similarities coming from pus and sperm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture that causes numbness from hornets and chief purges, as well as gargling, then you must causticate the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little further behind the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on the part that is unblemished, making it even shorter than a small coin above the tip of the head's horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as one such coin; leave the cautery until half the skin has scorched away; this is how the caustication works.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the incision type that we have shown before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires the knife to be slightly larger; after performing as I have explained above, until healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and if there's no improvement, and the patient does not have fever, then make three cauterizations: two above the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the forehead, and one at a place called "vessels" as we have said before; perform the subsequent cauterization over the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pills to cleanse the brain; afterwards, open up the top of the sick person's head entirely, and place upon their occipite a studium of sinapi which is described in treatments for plasters; this is how it is done: as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus done, well that is; and if not, then make three caudices from under the head to just below the collarbone with each being two finger-widths apart; treat as usual, and if you see them join together, also create a cautery in between; and if necessary, place another pair on top of the other two. Treat until it is well done, using the caudices called "olivary" as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	From coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be warmed by covering and as we have previously mentioned; after placing the head of the sick person on it, then perform cauterization in the head and over each horn; and four behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, then do four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and let it be as long as the pus lasts, and loosen your hand; after curing until healthy again, apply the caustic called 'olivare' that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilentic patients should only use a strong fire cautery if they are phlegmatic, and first, the skull must be cleansed along with other treatments we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering greatly from prolonged illness.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear the suffering, let them gargle and chew with cleaning the skull often using bones as food; then put in their mouth a piece of fat meat, and do the first cauterization as we have said before, and another on the vein, and at each horn; and if the patient is extremely ill and suffering, they should be cauterized as I mentioned for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine along the back and neck, using an olive cauterization according to how I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, they should be given a subtle cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excesses or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then the fire cautery for parts as we have said to those who have paralysis should be applied.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining vitality to melancholy, and the body is dull and moist, then give them something to drink so that the brain is clarified, according to what it currently is in its state in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the patient; after making a well-made tire with a circle shape and placing it in the head; and cross the patient's brow, and hold it firmly on all sides; then apply the ointment, and move outward from the center to the edges; and warm up butter from old sheep fat at once so that the patient can bear the heat as much as possible; after making a circle inside the head, let it cool down; and do this once every week with another good governance until he is sane.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see to be cauterized by making many points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This manner of cautery moistens the brain evenly; then place upon cotton with butter and lamb fat.
de l’awe des eulz	From around the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs come first around the eyes as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that clarifies the mind, and prevents all moisture, and they sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After instructing to return his head, and making a fire cautery in the middle of the head, and making two small cauteries on top of the two temples where the humors are located together or in one; apply a covering over the entire cautery for all veins and arteries that come from under the skin; let the length of the cautery be according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if too much blood is seen, then stop it with a dressing as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and making an incision, how to bandage it as you should; never make a cautery or heater under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	Here are tears from the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed, and on the veins or near the arteries that appear just before the forehead; and you see they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then apply the caustic as I said at the beginning of the last section: one cauterization in the head, two over each temple, two under each eye socket; and if more is needed, carefully apply small cauterizations above the eyebrows.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Throughout the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of urine (urine therapy); after that apply a caustic or milder cautery on his head; and make two "clove" cauterizations called clavicles above each eyebrow, but slightly below the brows; and be careful not to harm any artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply this fire cautery called "olivariate".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This has such a form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the two warts as long as the eyelids are; do not let go of the hand except until one-third of the membrane is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Of hairs which prick the flesh
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never an occasion when the hairs of the pores are converted into pus and they prick the flesh, and one applies caustics in two ways: that of fire or burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	s.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the wound you have marked with small and frequent applications, let the skin be healed at that spot; and signs of the health of the wound are when you see the paper retracted, and hairs raised to their natural length; then cleanse your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat with ointment until well.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow in and the paper is softened as before; then resume the cautery at that same place as previously done; and if the hair is sparse, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level and becomes even, without touching the original hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicinal cauterization is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle leaves; then take French soap and hot salt water each one (measured) amount, grind them well together quickly so it does not cool, and sprinkle on the form as you made with myrtcuid.medicine leafy, and put onto the paper the mixture; if the disease holds in just one part only, work is done at once, and if both alike; and put cotton soaked in oil underneath; and the patient's head is clean and put your two fingers showing on the medicine, and press a little bit every time when the patient feels mordancy from the medicine, because he feels it as if of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this thoroughly, apply the appropriate medicinal remedy to it.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the irritation is gone, raise the wound's edge, and observe if the paper lifts as though it had been lifted by a constraint of fire or by incision; if so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If this is not the case, then reset the medication to its original position if it has not worked properly; keep the treatments equal and the eyes sharp-pointed; next apply cotton soaked in oil until the core becomes closed off, followed by the ointment of "dyafenis" or another suitable one, until healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you must closely guard your work with great care to ensure the medication does not drip onto the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hairs prick in the oil, start again with medication on that spot properly where it was done before; care for it until healed; this is the method of the fold without fear.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so shall be your instructions; and do not return them to their proper place for those who seek knowledge in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to put his head in your hands; and instruct the assistants that they place the patient's head between their hands so it does not move or turn its head; afterward, place soft cotton on a spoon with vinegar or juice of parsley underneath it; then heat the caustic which is parted: and be placed at the crown as like a quill of an owl, together that the caustic be attached from one side to the other, and if you see, so straight on both sides, but anyhow, this that is placed above can move for your procedure.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the pus, and drying it out; and if it is closed, then work on it again and treat along the edge of the bowl; afterward place a hot caustic substance onto it well, and hold your hand at the caustic near to the part without pain above the oil, so that your hands do not go astray; and put the caution into the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you approach the beginning of fire cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, resume the cautery once more if needed, and leave it for three days; after that, place soft cotton soaked in butter on it, and apply dry ointment until healed, and after forty days when the bone is exposed, apply corrosive acrid medicine until fully healed; then follow as per your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 To treat a fistula, and loosen the skin; then insert an I-shaped fine rod of which this form is:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And make the quantity of one Z. of lead; and hold your hand or rod firmly, ensuring that the patient does not move so the molten lead flows into its oil; and it is appropriate to place above the affected area a cotton wool in a vessel with half as much: the lead will fill the location of the abscess, and healed miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the caustic method we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then you must administer the treatment by piercing near the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its proper place on the body as needed.
des crevaices en levres	From cracks of the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often, there are cracks in the lips called "hair," especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scissor-like fire cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	they are in, and if the same as heal et cet the most:
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of an abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the ear, palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it has become putrid and rotten and old and becomes a fistula; treat as we have said in divisions, but it does not heal: then you must apply one cautery according to the quantity of the febrile. After removing or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until pus flows from its source, and after that; do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy again; if treated this way, it will be good; but if not, then you must expose the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your textbook.
dou movement des dens	By movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, treat it with medicines as needed, then put your head in clean water; after cooling the cautery, place one so that you put a cone over the tooth; insert the hot cautery deeply, and hold your hand while the patient feels warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery at your discretion; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let it sit for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held in place, and the moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the tooth's pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold or heat and medical remedebe not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: caustic butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter when taken from fresh butter and the end is shaped into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, allowing butter to coat it, and apply quickly to the aching tooth until cooled; thus do often as long as its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the woolen thread and cotton in butter cool, then place on the painful tooth, placing a heated iron on it until heat is felt at the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire caustics as such that you may choose a stake of iron or steel, and make it large enough so the flames do not harm the patient; after heating the caustic, from which pain will come soon afterward, place it on the wart and hold your hand until the caustic has cooled. Do this often, for the pain will be lessened that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the cautioning of this treatment, and then strengthen the wound; and that's the nature of the fire cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a cautery on the primary vein you wish, and according to what you are able; and this is the shape of the channel.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas (tuberculous swellings)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofula is of cold humours and obeys not to digestion by medicines, then apply fire caustics from which afterwards follows its nature, having two openings for smoke to exit on the other side; apply hot caustic to the abscess once or as often as necessary until it reaches the surface of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply caustic according to its quantity and leave in such a way for three days; then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn heals. Afterwards cure with ointments and bandages until it's healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the canal:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When ulcers overwhelm the channels of the throat, especially when caused by cold complexions, then it is necessary for patients to first be purged with soluble medicines; after which do a fire cautery at the root of the throat and ensure that you do not come close to the throat itself but just slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the fire cautery is done at the joint of the neck near the top of the spine, and perform the fire cauterization called "clavile" as we have described before; and heal it as we have said before until it becomes healthy.
de la toust	In cases of throat inflammation.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	In cases of cold moist throat conditions, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and it is an early illness, then do two cauteries on each side above the lips; and another cautery in between the legs; and use the "clavile" cautery as per the form which was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, do fire cauterization by pricking at all the fire cauterization called "points" as mentioned before in ear diseases; and let them be up to thirty or around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the joint as mentioned above, place the cautery at three points following this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are the cauteries lighter because you make them into three parts.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tried, then you must first address the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After examining the patient's back and ribs; then lift the head that is within the throat near your left hand's wrist joint; and if the joint is dislocated, heat the caustic with two iron needles as indicated by its shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the head all the way to the ribs, with four caustics together; and thus is done cauterization using the iron needle that has three points, for which reason the figures of cauterization are these four points; and the nerve is according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the iron needle with three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	At times it is located near this nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery near to it, make incisions with scissors; afterward let the patient rest, and do not move their limb for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it dislocates again, such a thing rarely happens; then make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauline, or many small cauterizations pinching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is reset, and there is still moisture and the patient feels relief.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When coldness and excessive moisture often occur in the stomach up to his complexion, causing numerous hemorrhoids for him, with usual methods of treatment that do not help; then it is necessary for the patient to be bared on their back, stretching out legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After this, the patient should have three fire cauterizations below the jugular vein near the neck in the quantity of a two-ounce coin, at all wound sites. And then four cauterizations forward from the two ribs until the appearance of the cauterizations is at three angles, with equal space between each so they do not join together when they shrink; and the cauterizations should be small enough to blacken the areas near the vein, and their shape should follow this form without crowding.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see a large cauterization in the stomach following this form; and for those who fear this cauterization, perform one by pricking and pressing above the stomach at that spot according to the quantity seen in urine; then cauterize the entire area called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we had before, as long as it is sound.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver comes in pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, until it is forcefully restored to its natural condition by superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said before in divisions, but he does not benefit, so it must be made supine on his abdomen; and then according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding near the epigastric region where the contour of the body comes. Have spaces between each cautery equal to a thumb's breadth; and let the cauteries be long in the course, but do not press too much with your hand over all the cautery; and it should only burn just halfway through its flesh, and position the patient directly above his feet; and if he cannot stand, then lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms. This is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish, if you cauterize these cutting-edge wounds using the burn, provided that you are skilled and wise in the art, and ensure that you do not burn the entire area, for this would cause all of the body to dry out; and it should not reach the vein, for the flesh is very delicate at this location, and requires careful observation.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 If there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know if it is on the outer surface of the liver or under a layer: if it is on the outer part, then the patient feels pain but not too severe; and if it is underneath a layer, then they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment of the boils is in order, it requires that the patient be on their stomach; and then raise the limb or place where the abscess is located, and then heat the cautery which looks like a reed:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And with the fire cautery until the core is burnt, and comes up to the ulcer, until the festerings are all out; after treatment according to the treatment of discharges until they are healthy; and it does not require that from this used cautery any harm be caused by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, through whose hands these diseases have once spread.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it can hardly work well, and nevertheless, I think that even if he is allowed to move.
dou cautere de pleuresin	t (de ars to: it e tirdt et les; man: C.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Ancient ones said that one should make pleurisy cauldrons from aristolochia roots in the following way: take an aristolochia root as long as possible, and let it dry; then grind it to be of the same thickness and length as your thumbs; mix with oil, hold over fire, and perform one large cauterization between the forelock and collarbone, two small ones slightly descending in the area below the beard; two more between the fifth rib and sixth, inclining backward a bit; one at the sole of foot, another above the stomach, two between shoulders, two on either side of the lower chest; where you performed the cauterization between the shoulders. Do not press with your hand too hard, but do so openly as when smelling something pleasant.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some old ones say that no man should use fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; and then there is great pain to him, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, as a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	It seems that there is some missing text or information here: "of this work"; please provide the full contextual details if available. If you need more text is provided; otherwise confirm with the final output below. Here we are missing due to a historical medical knowledge in context of evidence but for translation and further analysis, based on its reliability (historical medical practice or not accurate; consult relevant historical practices was historically context provide an example: Historian'ise as evidenced by documentary sources which is debated: the context.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the illness of madness as we have described in its various treatments, and it proves unsuccessful, then there are three methods of cautery that all work well.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are two ways to perform the treatment: firstly, do three or four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the wound, following the shape of the caustic described earlier; and do not press your hand onto all the cauterization points simultaneously, instead place the patient on their back. Another method for cauterization is where you heat the caustic with two nails as shown in shoulder dislocation treatment; lift the skin at the wound site or where the ribs of the patient come towards the left, and perform elevations by lifting the skin according to its size, following the body's width, and have the cauterizations aligned with the body'amo.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, and then use the caustic, thus it will have four; and if you see this, cauterize with the entire caustic on three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After curing when it has acquired pus over long periods, and this means to move like the other treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	De l'hydropisie
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Caustic does not apply to hydrops, but it is called in the manner referred to as "asclites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have discussed in divisions and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four caustics around the belly, one on the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back above the spine, and one place at the genitals; and let each caustic be close to the area where pain is felt.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the fire cautery open to let pus out for long periods, and do not abandon care of the patient after cauterization; healing would be faster, and both intentions are with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cautery for the belly is a key as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be an olive-shaped one, as it is placed before now.
de l’enfleure des piez	From inflammamoins of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and full of yellowish bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back behind the pinkie between the ring finger and little finger; and lift your hand with the cautery turning away from you.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, thus constricting the yellow bile; and make the cautery according to this method.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on two legs two cauldrations in each leg at the ankle bone point; and let the cauldration be long, one below the knee forward and the other backward, within the leg; leave the cauldrations to grow long enough for the bile to come out; after curing the other procedures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	For the treatment of menorrhagia (heavy menstrual bleeding).
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of an upset stomach comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines become inflamed, they cannot be treated by conventional means; thus observe the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then perform a large cautery on the stomach as instructed before or the cautery of the stab wound, around which the cautery circulates; also four subtle cauteries surrounding the belly button to one cauterizing point, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then perform a cautery on the palm, and one cauterizing point on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Regarding the care of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When bursae are founded or one or several, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have described in divisions, but do not benefit, so make the cautery: III on the spine of the back, that which is just forward of the iliac bone a little at a time in triangular pattern, and I cauterize below the arse II fingers; and if you think its stomach has cooled off, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then make a large cautery on the abdaster as previously described, and another on the liver, and another along the muscle with all the pointed cauteries; leave the cautery open for long periods of time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the joint as long as it is sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the hardness which is called "theil"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat an ulcer, heat the cautery which appears like a scraper, and then place it fully ablaze on that ulcerated area; and leave your hand as well as the cauterizing instrument at the birth of the vein so blood flows from it, of which there is much; do this once or twice, and if there are many ulcers, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards use beneficial ointments until they heal; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an inflamed area, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	Improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When patients cannot endure bandaging or wrapping, we will tell you about it in its place; if a disease comes that cannot be healed but only by fire cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When any wound becomes an ulcer and is old and infected with rotting pus and corrupted moisture, you should test the entire area thoroughly, and know exactly how far it extends throughout the region.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After healing the wound that appears shriveled, and fill it with cauterization into the ulcer according to how much has entered therein, and continue the cauterization as long as the flesh is at risk and corrupted; once or twice or three times depending on the amount of time required. Also beware not to injure the nerve that is present within, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the ulcer reaches the bladder and intestine, be careful of these veins, and do not create a fistula that is too deep, and understand that they are not all pernicious; after healing the wound as long as it is sound, and if the vessels are oozing, and the materials have been there for a long time, then know that the vessel is entirely sound; and if the materials have not been there, know that the vessel is thrombosed and corrupted at its source; and thus as one of these we will say in relation to the wound.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	The translation of de l'avent sus les rains dite avient paroles qui li, ontes la mors; semblables tout le fistlesque tu leucilment l’an des maladis talies dui cauteres et vintes avont.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold from moisture, and the patient holds in urine, then make a fire cautery on the area below the bladder where hair begins to grow at the fingertip; and let each be as long as we are of one finger. And make another cautery above the back or two if needed; and make these cauldraries according to the previously mentioned shape.
de la marris	Of the bone marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed endings; when they come, there is great pain: then one must make three cauldrons around the fold, as we have said of the bladder cautery, and two behind the back; the third cauterizing pegs, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moist veins flow down to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the muscles are pulled away from their origin, then one must cauterize the patient on the thigh bone with a single caustic similar to a circle, and make two others in front of the fold as it turns, so that the bone lies within the circle; and be the caustics such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si ces cauteries ne te sont pas présentes, alors fais trois cautères du laurier sauvage grands, et que soient les cautères aussi ronds comme toutes les clés ; et traite jusqu'à ce qu'il soit sainé.
de la dolor de la hainche	And from the pain in the hip.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes from the groin area, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have described in the division and treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing fire cautery; the manner of doing so has two methods: namely, combined with caustic remedies and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery has many methods, among which one is as follows: you perform triangular burns with three caustics according to this shape, ensuring good depth and size, spacing each caustic about the width of a thumb, resembling an olive; never performing burns within the middle of the shoulder bone because in that way there are four following this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the triangular burn on the circle previously mentioned for elbow dislocation; but perform it so that the circle contains the entire joint capsule, and all areas with color are scorched.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method used for sciatica when pain persists in the shoulder and does not reach up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it comes up to the thigh and leg, make the caustic as the patient says where the pain is held, with four caustics above the ankle on the left part; and be the incision at the base of the nail, and thin the fleshy area with heat; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two fingers near the sole or close to it, cauterize there where they feel the pain three times or four using the caustic called 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary to do so and the pain increases; and if it has been determined that the pain originates from beneath the genitals toward the thigh, then perform cauterization with a caustic or circular caustic, ensuring in all your cauterizations that you neither prolong the burning of the nerves nor the large arteries, and do not cause further harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 I have seen some who made a caustic on the sole of the foot, and they wore it until the entire leg was gone, and so were the bones too, which became pierced and completely corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After an abdominal incision which resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, do a fire cautery on one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the surgeons say in the thigh cauterization, as is described here, make an iron of one thickness similar to a newborn's thumb or slightly less, and let it be placed between the two with space equal to that of nine peas; the intervals should be over two parts, and also notched like those, and there must be an evenly wrought bar.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be warmed until they are all red and sweaty with heat; then place it on the boiled pouch of the bad elbow, and turn it over the sound ribs; then cauterize once with one firebrand and leave for three days; afterwards apply a poultice of butter, and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; after applying ointment until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this little caustic treatment because of the fear of its appearance, and few dare to do so; yet it is a good caustic, which can withstand pain, and where one finds relief.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The medicine fire-cauterization is that you make an instrument with notches where the margin descends, made of copper or iron long enough and high at both ends, and between each have the thickness equal to twice a pea; they should slope downwards on both sides and join together according to this shape.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the saddle pad on the patient's bent hip near their rib cage, and quickly place your hand over it; then pour a mixture between the two circles of hot pitch heated in the fire for one hour, allowing the patient to feel the warmth and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it also produces irritation as with fire; and once the irritation has subsided, raise your hand with the instrument and gently lift the hip pad, leaving it so for three days, and apply butter until what is black on the bruise disappears; then leave it to rest for another three days, as a final aid after ointment treatment until healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, use an instrument to warm it as you did in the elbow equally; and this is the method of applying hot compresses, which I have written or discussed in the treatment of medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal amounts of alkali and quicklime, grind them together, and place in a new flask.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Where there is a small opening through which the tip of a razor can enter; place another well-bonded pot over it and put above the alkali and quicklime with gentle warmth until you have added two handfuls of powder as thoroughly prepared by your hands; leave thus, until it pours out moisture and heat into the bonded pot, then take all that warmth, and pour onto chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 Et alors ce sera beaucoup d’agitation et sera stabilisée par des moyens de médecine et au moyen de cautérisation sur d'autres membres car elle fait tout travail comme fût, et s’il y a d’autres remèdes dont on bien calcule la hanche ainsi que tisin, miel d'anacardier et chaulmoogra avec savon, toutes ces choses mêlées ensemble.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galien tells us of a case wherein an honorable man was healed from hip pain and sciatica, with much relief, and said that no other treatment was administered, and it remained healthy even once when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in such a manner that you pluck the fresh and dry litargium root, grind it well with little fat, apply to the haunch, thigh, and limb where pain holds, and wrap; let it rest for three hours depending on how much less the patient feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then have him enter a bath until his body is slightly revived, and let him take the root, and the pain will go away completely, leaving him well-rested.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And understand that no one should use such medicines in fire cautery unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscurides states that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goats' dung, it greatly helps; and the cautery must be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take the ligament and moisten it with old oil, and place it over the hollow between the thumb and the other called phosicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry flaxen threads and holding them in the fire until they become charcoal, place it on the ligament, and let it be so until it turns ash. Do this repeatedly, and continue to do so as long as you feel by touch that it reaches up to the hip joint, and the pain ceases; these methods of cauterization are called "flaxen thread cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	From back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar signs of cold matter expanded, among these resemblances none warrants cautery, rather that of one who suffers from infusion of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has vomited from foul pills or other similar signs, one should place them on their back where they feel pain, making three lines marked by dots, and in each line apply 5 cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and make the cauterization as is called "points"; and if you see, do 3 or 4 at the median clavicle following this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have tight anuses when they defecate, and fear; and you find it on the very last spine of the back and above it appears like those over the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and it appears to heal, then apply cautery with a caustic stick in the following manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the caustic is intended for each part of the spine, it will be equalized.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, using the caustic around the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three lines, let them be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the limb until it is healthy as we have said, and beware not to perform a caustic treatment in areas of nerve swelling that are numb.
de la dolor des jointes	To alleviate joint pain.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is from moistures spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes to the feet which those called 'podagra,' properly so named, and when it is due to cold causes and remedies do not heal it, then they are treated with cauterization in this manner: make numerous cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let them be olive oil cauldrons according to this shape:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need for you to hold up the face over the feet, make a caustic treatment in all areas that we call "none".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains extend to joints and other areas, which often happens, make a caustic treatment on each third genoil III or IV of every part, on all olive oil; and if more is needed, do so but do not hold your hand far from where the pain appears.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to joints and the back, administer the caustic treatment as we have mentioned in that chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 If the pains are in the hands, make points around the forearm twice; and if there is no pain in the elbow, make points on each joint and along the hair of the hand; and if the pains come near the edges or near the shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care to the patient and give soothing medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will recover with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the nature of its use
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When dislocation comes with the legs hanging down and it is new, when you see that you need to treat it, do not let them sit up for the day; use things that ease the belly so the sinews descend from their stomachs. After they lie on their back between your hands, instruct them to stretch their thigh as long as the dislocation is repaired and reattach the limbs at your elbows, and bind tightly under the dislocated joint over the bone of the wrist; then heat with the caustic in which this form is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and pus-free.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then clean the wound at its location; and have the minister wash his hands so they do not touch again later; work well on the patient's thighs, and put a cloth undernee and a bandage over their thighs, and another below that which ties to their hands; then place the cautery across your entire hand, both lengthwise and widthwise until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach on the first attempt, repeat again as needed until you get close to the bone; be careful subtly that pus does not come out when making the cauterization; do not burn it; and prevent by this the patient or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach up to the bone with the fire cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the fire cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for large people also be of appropriate size; after three days treat them with butter on the burn until the osteolysis occurs; then treat with other unguents until they are healthy again, and apply poultices for forty days on their backs until the wound is well sealed; it is necessary that they rest adequately so that buboes do not emerge when they rise from bed to sit.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, be well bandaged properly, and maintain it for another forty days; have good rest, work a little and avoid excessive drinking and eating, and too loud shouting; and once this teaching is complete, they are fully healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say afterwards about the treatment of tailors in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal surgery
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When tumors come to other bodies and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, make the fire cautery as it returns according to its quantity; be sure of the third part by weight; after treating as we have said; and none of the ancients have mentioned that one should cauldrify at the caustic iron at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first mark the head of the nail and make a line for the width above the tumor; and another below it, and hold your hand with both caustics clamped together.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first caustic is lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any member, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is not effective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cauters are to be according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, strength, location of torsions, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is near the first cautery well; if not there, start another cautery above that, because it is customary for it to be moved to the member closest to it, so that you must make the cauters until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of medical treatment
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The bile has been treated several times by cautery with great help, especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 When you can see the wound to be starting, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither swells nor remains indolent, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the illness, then do three cauterizations on the head: one near the forehead at the start of the hair, and another towards the end of the brows; and two above the ears, and one behind the temple; and leave enough space for the hot iron to reach almost to the bone, so that any scabs allow large humors' vapors to escape; and cauterize according to what it appears before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	Et si le mal est partout dispersé; et il apparaît manifestement, donc tu as droit à ces cautérisations que nous avons mentionnées précédemment, y compris celui qui se situe en bas du nombril, ainsi que deux sur la colonne vertébrale de l'épine dorsale, et cinq au-dessus, et une grande quantité à proximité du coccyx et une autre près des parties génitales ; ainsi que deux aux deux omoplates ; deux aux côtes flottantes ; deux sur les tendons des pieds ; une pour chaque articulation de la main et des orteils ; au-dessus des creux palmaires. Et veille à ne pas brûler les nerfs qui se trouvent derrière, ainsi qu'à éviter d’effectuer l’opération chirurgicale sur le radius ou l'os du côlon, et une autre sur la vésicule biliaire.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more cauterizations you do, the greater aid it provides, and benefits the patient; and understand that the ill do not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy do, for their bodies are already wholly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 The caulteries must be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in handling iron devices.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After cleansing with wheat flour washings mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healthy again.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling occurs in any limb, treated with medicines and oils and poultices, but it is not healthy again, then you must make cauteries on the limb according to its size; let the cautery be slightly translucent at the color of a hazelnut. Then treat with oil until it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At any time made a cautery on the hand, foot, and back where a nerve causes immobility of the limb, then there is bone swelling; but do not interfere if one does not know about the movement of nerves in limbs through the body.
de albaras	The skin on the affected area becomes reddish and swells up after cauterization, and it should be treated carefully to avoid further damage or infection.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is chronic and medicine proves ineffective, then cauterize with a slight caustic, according to the quantity of the flesh color, until the redness subsides, and its color changes; then treat with flour meal, lentils, oil infused with rose petals, and plantain leaves, along with collagen and eagle blood extracts from each in equal parts; mix them all together and bind it with a cloth, apply it to the area until healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When cancer begins to appear, if you see it can be stopped, then cauterize with a caustic circle around the entire area of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And also the wise say that caustic treatment is done in the middle of the cancer; however, I do not think this is good, for it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen such a result before; moreover, the better thing to do is to cauterize around it with a caustic circle as we have said about many caustics.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	if you, au is:
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which causes them to delay dying due to excessive discharge or because the patient is old (that is, too weak) and they have little blood, or from other reasons: then hasten their death by cauterizing around with many small caustic spots; afterwards let it remain in this state.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 This will cause severe suffering.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire cauterization being pierced, then heat the cauldrons so that they are connected.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the midst of that disease called 'adubelati' until you feel its heat with the caustic, and it should be such caustics so that the patient feels them moving forward like the flow of putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After curing, when it becomes perfectly healthy again.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 There is another disease called 'corrodens', and it's nothing but a mixture of limbs, for they eat the members as fires consume dry sticks.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease present that can be treated with caustics and fire at the same time, then first soothe the caustic wounds both small and large according to what is needed for its location or nature of the illness; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, leaving nothing remaining, ensuring that everything corrupted be ossified.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it be for three days, and apply boiling oil to the cauldrated wounds until the fire burns are healed, and all decay is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment with ointments that produce joy.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days the wound shows no sign of healing, it is good; and if not, resume the fire treatment on the part that remains corrupted by the cauldration.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this mixture is never used to treat an acute fever instead of the fire cauldration; but still, the fire cauldration has greater benefit, and I have already described the treatment for acute fever in the separation [section]: take the amount you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of small piles which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often it happens that in the feet from behind arises a disease called "closed," according to our understanding, and is a large growth that affects the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And this treatment for the disease has two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, fire caustication and hot water caustication.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Fire caustication is such that you prepare the cauterization tool as if it were a pen made of wax, and it should be good iron capable of piercing all parts, with sharp edges; after making it hot by placing it above the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the boiling point of the nail; leave it thus for three days until you see pus emerging; then make an incision with a scalpel and place a poultice made from finely ground henbane leaves on it throughout the night, after which the nail will draw out and be rooted out.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the joint with soothing ointment until it is healed enough.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then if it is turned inwards by default into the body, and this occurs many times in hands and feet, you must perform a cautery with hot water; and here's how: take a tin of copper or iron, or a spoon of lead, place it on the mole so that it completely covers it, then put some hot water in it, hold your hand tightly, press backward until the edge of the tin reaches the root of the mole, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply down to its root; let the patient endure a bit of the burning sensation from the hot water for an hour; then leave it as such, and it will uproot all at once.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus make one after another, as you touch all those in the body, then treat them with ointments that entwine hair.
li cure dou trembler	by them from of the t end they cone are not s, le to l’a to: de f pains is it; and wixtreams: after nail ete.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shivers from coldness of nerves or fever quartan or other, it is necessary to make them four cauterizations or four on the spine along the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the base, and one over the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling, and their health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Never appear before the body is washed, or boils and foul sores arising from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary when they appear that you do a caustic on each boil: a subtle caustic from the wood of myrtle, with the point taken in fire, or from a long root of aristolochia, or at a spherical caustic.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And not causticize on the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are broken from excesses that come, and are clean; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is ligated
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times it happens that there are great blood flow issues from the ligated artery to wounds caused by paradoxical events, or incision of an abscess, or cauterization on a limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if it happens to you, hurry and put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very tight until the blood is calmed under your finger; then apply with fire small olive oil cauterizations both large and small until they are all red; then take .i., or a large or small one according to the size of the wnid and its location, where the artery runs, and place the cauterization over that vein on which you hold your finger, and keep it there as long as the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps out when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the caustic is extinguished, then quickly take another from the ones that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do so one after the other until the vein is fully closed; and be careful not to burn the nearby nerve, and that no further harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut off, it cannot be properly sealed by itself if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by caustic or extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong bandage with thread, or by medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and make them tied and held simultaneously.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tight bandaging with cloths or other burning substances if it does not prove effective.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger under the wound on the vein as we have said, and extend it well until it is resting above the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten with cold water often so that it may be quite cold until the blood congeals and thickens and rests; then make incisions where needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, causes, essences, and forms of cauterizations; and I placed that chapter up until fingers, and I will now proceed in this chapter along the same path so that you find more easily what you seek.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this one, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater care is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter, there are often instances of blood evacuation when opening veins, treating abscesses through incision, wound healing, arrow extraction, stone cutting, and similar procedures; where doubt and fear arise, leading to death for some.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you to not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If they come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die easily due to the severity of their disease and its magnitude; for we must have fear of these cases.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these are those who regain their senses, and say: "Wait, I am awake"; but the disease is in defiance.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting for you to consent to those who come seeking from this manner, but rather give more consideration to your honor than your desires, and act not foolishly but wisely based on what you are certain of and have learned; and use prognosis and indication in treating your sick with a view to converting their health; for it will aid in acheiving good renown, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and integrity, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as they appear before you in the section of cauterizations that I have described from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at its head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the childbirth channel tightly grips the head of the child; sometimes it heals without a known cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all that I have observed it is swift to cause death; therefore, for my part, it seems better to focus the treatment on certain healing methods.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	the et thes conbt in de sonne with S’s; s sgrin te ou f ici leme by themde other (t la croirement se est ils termeward.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If moisture is very great, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture is from under the bone and the signs you see are exposed commissures on each side, and the vein springs out when pressed with your hand inside, and it has not been repositioned: then it is necessary that you make three incisions within the head as follows.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision has been made, all moisture is removed.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After straining with linen and powders, then adding wine and oil, let it sit until the fifth day; afterwards remove the bandage, treat the wound with compresses and ointments, allow proper head support, and give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to observe whether the head of the abscess is swollen and the collected veins; for it never lies in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Indeed, open the abscess properly and fill with water, then follow according to your ability; and be careful not to cover the artery; ensure a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the deterioration of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	To restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens with any disease that is called 'catarra' in the eyes or on the genitals, and the illness has been long-standing, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort of treatment will be cauterization along with those three arteries that are cauterized.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you see the wounds healed, ensure that the patient raises their head; afterwards rub them on both sides with rough linen until the arteries are visible, then extract their collar completely from all fabric; then examine if there is any bleeding near and behind the ears, and few hairs have grown back; then trim the edges of the scars, then bandage each side evenly with a piece of cloth measuring two parts wide, until the neck seems to touch the bone and the scar appears smooth.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, place the strip below the artery and cover it above, cutting as two fingers width across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, let it be punctured continuously inwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the arrow does not open by touching it, you must measure a length of three thumbs (dois), then tie off and cut up to the bone; that which is due in blood is six thimbles (c/), plus or minus depending on what the patient can endure and the replenishment of the arrow. Then examine the wound: if it remains close to the bone, do not apply an absorbent bandage unless there are any exudates; then dress the wound and tie with a bandage until healed.
de emigrainne	To remove a splinter
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient splinter is present and the patient has acute cataracts, caused by moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and similar things, and all forms of medicinal treatment do not help him, we extract the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization, as we have written.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The method of extracting them is that the patient must comb back the hairs on their temples and listen to the pulse in the temple, as it opens well due to its beating, and is quickly restored like some men who are too cold; when it restores, instruct the patient to tighten a cloth around their neck, then rub an abrasive cloth over their skin, and apply hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then use this spatula:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then scrape the skin gently until you reach the artery, then fold it in at the edges with towels that are outside each part; if the artery is delicate, and turns at the tip of a pin, then apply an absorbent bandage according to the amount of two thimbles.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If not treated properly, it does not heal at all completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of the three veins until it reaches three fingers in length; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two pieces of a strong double thread of silk so that decay does not come before the healing of the wound, and for bleeding to stop; then cover the excess tissue between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize the flesh until reaching bone as long as the veins are tied off; this is a complete work, unless the patient has fever and he is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is of great assistance to end swellings, for it provides greater aid against them.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For when extracting arteries, fill the area with old cotton and apply well-made bandages; after removing them, treat it with dry medicines that generate heat and bandages until it is healed; if there is any cut from the artery as much as you do work on it, haste to cauterize with fire, or fill the area with vitriol and strain it in your hand so it becomes discharged; and if not present, place something cool over the area until numbness occurs, and apply cold water to the area until the heat subsides, and strain as needed; and for those that are movable and lighter during artery extraction is to cauterize with a sharp fire caustic of 2 parts, but ensure the sharpness lasts longer by being well-prepared.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when there are too many sweatings, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a sufficient space, and then when you hold them tightly in place with both hands, make the iron glow until it reaches up to the bone, cut open the vein on both sides; and they should be removed from between the shoulders because there is no such cautery for all cases; this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	And tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes descend into veins that are under the forehead's surface, and there is no benefit from medicine that can be applied, and you see the face of the sick person turning red like with flickers; and their hair on the eyelids become damp so much that the skin peels off, and they become burned by the heat of tears, such a case requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 They called the ancient "bruise cure," and you should make three cuts in the hair of a patient with this condition on their forehead; then make two equally spaced slits according to the length of the forehead, one from ear to ear across the top down to the nose, and the other two parallel to the width between the cheekbones, but do not incise any arteries in that area. Also ensure your hand is away from the continuation of the jawline; each cut should be as wide as three thumbs together. Have a piece of sponge ready along with several layers of cloth to soak up blood, then apply pus-drawing ointment over two parts corresponding to this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is below the second to the first; and scrape off all skin that lies between the two incisions through to the bone beneath, then make another cut from the middle incision towards the other end, and then extract this tissue sample.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If the instrument called "culterius" is placed into the first opening, it is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And insert the splint towards the chest near the spine, and the ribs facing the bone, and adjust until it reaches the midpoint split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And bind all the vessels that descend from the head until the incision is continuous to the area of the spine opening, then further down to the other end; and draw blood equally, expressing the place where blood was taken; then insert in each split a tent made of old cotton, and cover with cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form; after three days untie the ligature, and apply abundant plantain leaves' decoction, followed by applying basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	The reason for this is to prevent infection and promote proper healing after the procedure has been completed.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When certain catarrhs occur habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with impaired vision, and burning of the papillae; and hairs fall out, and there is a throbbing pain at its core, and patients sneeze; thus from these incidents it can be known that such materials and those catarrhs do not come only from many veins, but also from their distemper.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you command the patient to return his forehead, then make a large incision there in the middle of it, and another one that is quite wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision all the way up to the bone; then move your hand away from the nerves in the temples when they move during eating; and when the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, and then wrap between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool; then apply linen soaked in wine and oil on top; and take care to prevent heatstroke from the abscess; once it has been set, rub the bone until scars begin to form, then treat with things that are anti-inflammatory, which heal.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And in this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wine spirit (colophony), mix them well; and administer it to the wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the stoppage of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains or beast matter, stone fragments like metal filings, or similar substances; seeds such as castor oil seed, peas, or beans; or fluids flowing like water and easily released, similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear stone or other manner of thing not near to the ear, nor does it grow in the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then drop some violet oil or sesame oil into it, and perform an extraction; and since there is a condition causing sneezing, plug the nostrils when sneezes occur, and place cloth pieces or wool around the ear; raise the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often it comes about from this treatment; and if it does not come out, then perform a delicate extraction with tweezers, which is the procedure:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it slips out through the pinceros, that's good; if not, make a subtle extraction at the oncine doublet with a small tool; and if it does not slip through this, create an eel stitch in the incision of the head or ear hole, then stuff around the incision with soft wax so that the winds cannot enter with the incision; then properly treat the area, as often slippage occurs just as we have stated; and if it does not slip off in this manner, take a point from where they take birds' nests, and use some precise instrument to aid in the process, placing a small amount of cotton around; then press on the glue above the wound or whatever it may be, and treat properly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out from all the methods we have mentioned, quickly make an incision in the ear as to where pus is present and spasms occur; and the manner of the incision is such that you first cleanse the patient's head, then drain the blood according to its severity, then have them sit between your hands with their ear turned upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near fat or tissue; and let the incision be as round as a moon until reaching the wound, then suture it as best you can, and suck out quickly into your mouth; and treat until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is not, then remove the pinceros if iou ne soiet graisse puis traite de lerement la pois estraient, et non a cue mout que il saut; et si bon esgretienk espouvrir les teneu penseil amont le veinte.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision in that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist from ear moisture, until you have tried multiple methods; then extract with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction be successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Then when it comes to the ear, the patient should use sneezing as a first measure, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And place gauze on that same ear where the moisture is present.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it comes off easily for this reason, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not come off easily for this reason, take multiple small and light pieces as needed according to your judgement, and heat them briefly by fire; then put the patient's own cloth in their ear, push on it from another side with fingers of other hand, insert a pebble underneaturally at the place where the moisture is. Continue this process piece by piece until all moisture has come out and left entirely; if you see that, take an elm branch, put one eye in the ear, and heat it until the thinner part becomes dry; then make another attempt with other branches until all moisture is gone as we have said for pebbles.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of animals (referring to worms), if it is small in size like fleas or similar things, treat as we have said for division; but if it is large that can be felt, then make an extraction with pincers; and it is easier to remove what lies inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not work, it is necessary to examine the ear under sunlight; if there are no visible worms, use fine pincers, and if they do not appear, take the cauliflower-shaped instrument.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be strait below and broad above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And fill the more subtle head in the ear according to the amount of the patient's pain, then seal it firmly all around with fat; do this often until everything is well closed up.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out as instructed, insert cotton around the fat seal as I have described in the stone; and if they do not exit as we have said, then administer dilutions that ancient physicians have tested with incision of leeches, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which has the form as such:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It should be made of silver or fine pewter narrower above and wider below, with small holes to allow for distillation and larger ones on top for pressing the distillation into a well-made ivory instrument; then take a rasp and wrap it around the tip gently, and cover it completely with cotton. Then pour your oil or juice into the ear canal, ensuring that they are in the ear; then insert the rasp through all the cotton and press firmly until the oil is distilled or as much as possible from the ear; and the patient feels relief, and let the distillations be at a fire so it can be distilled in the ear. And ensure that it does not too cold, because medicine would not as good healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the stoppage of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any openings in the ears; and this same thing happens in adults due to wound healing or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these blockages always occur at the front of the ear, so it cannot be seen; sometimes no hole remains for seeing, but all is well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	But when it occurs at the front and cannot be seen, it is of good healing in various forms, and in that which can be seen, one must place the affected ear to the sun; look inside: if you see an inflammation visible, do the work with all this matter where the form exists.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	so;s the ches thatnttutor are t s is pr  (also ; an Ouzen son les on a bax ca.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if a swelling is found in the ear, take a fine sharp blade and heat it slightly over fire, then place it on the outer part of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If the patient feels a swelling that causes ringing in their ears, make a small incision and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place a dressing on the ear according to its size, with mead as an ointment from Egypt.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not make any opening until the wound is healed, then take a tent and grease with rose water, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see an effluent ear, it's suitable to replace the tent and move another greased tent made of rosy oil and wax, as long as the swelling remains; afterwards care for it until health is restored.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and wrap in cold water, place on the ear, and employ other treatments that remove blood stagnation which are or to be treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This hair that comes in papers when wet and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tongs and tweezers, and the tip of a sterilized needle at its roots; then place upon white lead ointment.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not heal on its own, then by using the fine-pointed caustic tool for cauterization after the incision is made; and many times they regrow when nothing remains of their roots; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	Of clay
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times come in the ears things that seem frosty in form and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called "grandine" (hailstorm), consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the paper; its treatments are as follows: observe if the grandine moves from one side to another, knowing it's a light matter; then make an incision wide enough, carefully scrape each part, pinch out the fluid, and bandage.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot grasp it without piercing the paper slightly, nothing is harmful to the patient; and if the fracture is large, bind it with a suture, and care until it is healed; and if it is small, do not exert force, for the ointments will soon restore it and prevent infection.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	When the granulation is descending into the depth of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch it with forceps; if the paper is displaced by incision, it matters not; when the granulation has been compressed, gently wash away any foul water, and care for the area until the patient is healthy again.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Excoriation is an oily substance that appears on linens and papers above, occurring mostly in children but also in others, causing much harm to their eyes, leading them to have cataracts by morning, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears flow rapidly to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces until dawn, sleep, and are covered with moist linen papers from which the excoriation oily substance spreads.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press it back to its place with your hands and feel discomfort between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of treatment is such that the patient places his head in a tub; then takes a linen cloth and makes an arch-shaped tent according to the quantity required from each part, placing it over him; pressing with both hands on either side so that the parts come together within the circle; then make a slit in the middle of moisture at the spouting area, not wider than the wound made in the vein's skin; and continue cutting through the hide until reaching the parts; and in various positions, excretions from the fissure occur according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the whole cloth between your hands and turn it right and left until scattered; keep that you do not approach the fissure, so as to go up to the end of the spouting area, so as to scrape it clean.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the excretion does not open at the beginning of the fracture, then slightly widen the fissure until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten some linen cloths and water them, and place on top, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for such men who grind their nails and apply substances to spoil the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until it is sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes to the place, then apply a remedy with soothing substances until it is sound.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hair of parchment papers.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs on papers grow in a manner other than their nature and become aged, they harm the eyes and bring about diseases as with accustomed tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, which leads to destruction; and there are cures according to four manners: or by fire caustic alone, or by ague medicine as it is before this chapter on caustic, and it is done either by incision and suture or with cantharides, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the sheet of oil into your left hand; if it is turned correctly, well; if not, insert a needle through every single thread on top; and do this near the edge of the paper where hair grows near these threads, and draw one thread across all the paper, then roll it towards you with scissors; then cut along the part below the paper, next to the hairs closely grown, up to half a finger wide; then extract a filament, and place under the paper a small tent made of cotton and linen, then press down on the paper with an envelope-like shape as in mugwort leaves, and always ensure that the figure is according to the amount you see elevated by the paper when lifted from all sides.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is need to apply a large amount of paste according to how much the paper has been softened; then prepare all the surface within the lines you marked, starting from the great rim down to small ones; and it should have one of the fissures close to natural hair growth in an area similar to root swelling, then insert the needle into one of the two angles that curve upwards, then scrape off completely; then stitch the two edges together with a single thread of fine linen, drain any blood, and pluck away excess fibers around both eyebrows using various sticky substances if you wish to do so; otherwise, have no concern over it, leave the sutures and threads until three or four days pass; then treat the wound without any stitching agents that harden and tighten as we have discussed, for the paper regains its form with healing of the wound and joining together, but the suture is movable (as ancient texts say), and it's a procedure without fear. And if there is another method: and ensure the paper has a shape similar to a maple leaf, as we have described, with three needles removed in accordance with the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut out what is above in equal small forces according to the shape shown below.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 If you cannot hold the tongs and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread of any kind, insert it halfway into the figure, then insert another thread near the large corner, and the second thread near the small one; align both threads evenly, then lift your hand evenly, and remove all skin where you have sutured as we have explained, then stitch together the two edges of the wound with a seam, and cure until it is healed; if an abscess occurs at the incision, soothe it with cerote and similar oil-based ointment; there are times when hair on the paper is inverted: in such cases, use what we have said about the incision; but suturing on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of warts is as follows: and it is that you transform the wart according to what I have said, then make .ij. (two) incisions by hand, and .ij. (two) delicate ligatures equally long as the wart and broad like a thong; and tie the heads of .ij. (two) strings or where you hold the threads; then join one to another subtly above what stands out from the wart on oil, and strain both .ij. (two) ligatures firmly; leave them as such for several days, and the skin that has been strained will die, shrink, and dry up, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed and the cowl has become weakened, then treat until it heals; and if the wound were sewn up quickly, and the paper raised so hair cannot grow; and this is the form of two stitches that you make according to this figure, and in this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	First of all, one must select such operations where you take a fine needle, and insert a thin silk thread; then join the heads and carefully align them both finely, so that the length of the threads is about the width of a palm long; then arrange in the fold another short subtle silk thread quickly, and wrap around the head with the first filament; then place the patient's head in your hand sanitized, and ensure it is close to sunlight so that the operations are clearly seen, as these are very subtle and minute tasks; insert the needle through all the fold at the root of the hair nearest to it, and cut the paper hastily until you tear over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the fold, and place in the foln another hair if there is one or two or three or more; then carefully remove your fingers so that all the hairs appear smooth on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the fold is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will comb the fold from bottom to top along all the thread that you have arranged, until the fold appears full on sight through the oil; then you will comb the fold and the filaments, and leave them loose for two or three days or more, until the hair takes root in its place and new growth appears above it; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with it, and elevate that alongside, until it is separated out and then lifted.
de la porriture de l’oil	And lift so forth the hair from fold after three or .iiij.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease known as 'aleacrati' or the swelling occurs in the eye, it happens in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it occurs by sudden injury, or incision, or caustic application, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of treatment in this is that you split the welded joint, and separate its lips, and insert linen splints inside it, and wrap until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its care any substances that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 For if you do this, the illness may return worse than before; but in working with softening things, such as fenugreek; and steeped rosemary leaves or boiled linseed meal, and poultices made from any of these oils melted, and wrapped around a tent, treat it thusly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secrets of your treatment are that you must ensure it does not heal according to its previous form; and the treatments we have mentioned are only for addressing this disease so that it does not return in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From a wound caused by an instrument entering the eye.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness that is truly called "Axacrati," and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The occurrence comes from wounds and tears and fire cauterization and similar matters; and the method of treatment is such that you thread an awl with doubled wire, and bend it in the sheath, and pierce through the left corner to the right so that the wire reaches both sides of the sheath; then extend the sheath above all the needle, and attach a cloth strip wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the tear, then turn the paper, making two cuts inside the tear; let the tips of both flaps from the incision angles you made match, so when they are joined, the shape resembles the letter "R" with its tail; then remove that sheath according to the length needed for the paper edges on either side, following what we have described about the medicines and ointments, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary to make a clean incision above the hairline of the paper, and as mentioned before; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the procedure must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters skillfully devise all means possible to make the figure return to its natural shape; and the sickly do likewise, according to what needs treatment and adjustments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And on the suturing of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when this suturing occurs between the hands in such a manner that the paper above is sealed with the fat of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions; therefore it is necessary to put the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it upward; and stretch out the edges as much as you cut what is within the subtle edge, which should neither be too dull nor too sharp so that the patient does not suffer from an overly sharp or blunting edge; and make your incision lightly, so that the paper can resume its natural shape. It is healed, and there are no injections of acidic oil, but rather use lukewarm water and colostrum, and put a linen cloth between the paper and oil, then wool fleece; and after three days until it is clean.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the foot
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	He says that the nail has two kinds: one is nervous and appears like a hard sore with pus, and another which is not nervous but resembles a frozen moist blister; when touched with iron and heated in pincers, it cannot burn. Both types begin at the great corner of the nail, and grow slowly until they cover the entire field of view and light, as well as the movement of the toe.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is as follows: the patient places his head in a prayer position, then you work with him. He removes paper from your hand, then heats the nail using pincers; next, extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert a horsehair or wool fiber or ox hair thread into its tip; slightly bend the needle'clockwise and pierce through the entire length of the needle, attach the nail with the thread and pull it out from underneath, scrape all the way to the base of the nail where the vein is located, including the skin up to the head. Then cut off any remaining portion at the root near the corner; in such a way that through this incision the body does not produce tears as usual; and it should never be extended by itself only, but with thread just like we mentioned before. Afterward, scrape all delicate tissue of the type shown:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the spatula from touching and breaking the skin flap, and ensure the prunelle is not punctured; after incision, pour a bit of boiled soap into the wound, and along with it make use of lead-lined collar, and leave until the following day; then treat as needed until healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the knuckles do not enter, this appearance of a nail has often been treated with medicines; as described in the section, and if you see it swollen, treat the patient's pain, and use the light spatula slightly according to this method.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently remove the nail above subtly, and if you see that it does not reduce in size and there is a redness afterward, distill from your mouth into the lead-lined collar and along with it use wool bandage, and leave until the following day; then resume the other procedure according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in this regard as an abscess, then treat the abscess first until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh on the thigh causes great harm in that place, suspend it by a thread and cut off part but not all, so tears do not come forth; then let it drain into the oil red chyle which is made from litargur.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of yellow discharge coming out near the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 It is the practice of some men to apply red charcoal, covering the wart and restraint near the skin, then turning it downwards; and it appears as a rosy balustrade; thus the procedure is that the patient places his head in faith, then works on the hairs, shaping all parts conveniently with one incision, and holding firmly; then make the first cut, and work thoroughly with scissors up to the end, ensuring not to disturb the operation during this time; then make an incision as we have described for fingernail and minor force removal, as shown after this procedure; and when the incision is complete and all hair removed, apply oil from a squeeze or distilled coloured liquor and similar medicines corrosive, and place cotton with bandage wet, ensuring of abscess heat; if nothing remains, and the wound swells up, and you doubt infection hot, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedcuents for abscess heat; then return to your procedure until healed, thus achieving a charred appearance similar to this.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	Always ensure that you apply the natural remedy for each weakness of the vein; and in case of accident, treatment by fer; do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that limb affected members are restored.
des voines des eulz	From veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red swellings that are covered over the eye, they hinder its function and weaken the eyes every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Indeed, when you examine the eye in which swelling is present and there's nothing else wrong except for that, then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to tilt their head towards you, and then gently pinch those veins along the entire edge according to your wisdom, and let the fine veins double following this method.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two veins compressed per degree in one course according to this method:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	the P gr on they pnoie ou s... C:sirs* (flemente c ointise;d
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot grasp everything in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil of soothing things to alleviate eye pain and let it remain for several days until the pain is eased and the patient is assured against inflammation; then resume according to this method as long as it remains sound: this is the form of strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	Regarding the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the so-called "arissati" fistula is not healed by cauterization and with hot ague medicine as I have previously described, then make an incision over the abscess where it must die off, and draw out all the moisture that lies within, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and darkness, return it to its original shape using all parts of the instrument; and it's called "sharp head," and it should be made from fair iron for one chief reunion, and pointed like a file as in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the exposed bone in its original position, then turn it between your two fingers, and press with your hand a little until you know that the corruption is gone; do this once more, then restore the location of medical drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the joint is swoluted and hardened, and the body of the bowel remains so for forty days without regenerating or having abscesses develop, and no harm occurs, knowing that it's healthy; if not, then there's no other remedy than to reposition the fistula towards the nose nostril as follows: uncover the bone a second time with iron, and by medicinal agues, when it is opened again, take an auger according to this method, let the head of iron have three angles, and the shaft be reduced up to the surface as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it near the bone by the cheekbone, and keep your hand away from the oil pot, then turn it completely until it pierces the bone and causes pain to the patient because they can feel it if their hand is on their neck; and when you restore its original position with dry medicines as I have instructed, when the wax hardens and dries up, it moves towards the neck; this is a lighter matter for the sick person.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nose
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are opened entirely without disturbing the nose or narrowing it, then you bind the afflicted; then anoint them with oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and shirinjibi (myrrh), then apply compresses or hot irons to draw out pus without burning, and then stretch the nostril, placing a bandage underneath it and cloths; you prepare the cloths so that they are sufficiently soft, and fold each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the nose requires; then strain by placing a hardened flour paste above them, and resume applying compresses without burning; remove the compresses and let the nostril remain contracted day and night, if it needs to be pulled out greatly. Afterward, remove the bandage after one day and night, and when you see pus returning, that's good; if not, resume the bandages and cloths and oil and compresses until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The tearing of cloth seen
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the cloth used, it becomes perforated, and comes with particles like grains of resin, which are difficult to see; then you examine it closely, and if it's still usable, make small punctures near the base up to a certain depth, insert another needle or thread from the lower edge, pierce through, leave the first needle according to its position, sew together using a double thread portion of the material, pull tightly, remove the needle and apply plenty of boiled wool, leaving it until the threads are cut with the cloth; then treat the area with soothing agents until healed, ensuring that no part is restricted by any remaining cloth circle, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a significant appearance, delicately pierce near the subtle edge that comes from around the area, and drain any yellowish moisture and allow it to descend, entering almost immediately; then remove as much as possible until healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bowel of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease known as 'alcunati' is nothing more than a bow that has been assembled in the oil, resembling water flowing downward, but it is not; and the appearance of its treatment is such that you make the sick person sit on a specially prepared seat and straighten up, then take their head between your hands with both hands, and feel as long as you see the bow coming to touch your fingers; then it should be tied off, and do not remove or dismantle the lighting, and observe the patient's reactions as they would normally; and if it does not come loose, know that it is water, and if the assembly of the bow as we have said has not been done properly.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Seat the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatumile and gently rub over the horny skin near the joint until it bends; and when it has moved, let it flow into the warm watery mixture of honey or water or fenugreek boiled and mixed with honey, then apply other treatments as needed until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of waters from the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have observed the similarities in water retention, and what needs to be pierced for relief; if necessary, perform surgery according to health considerations.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 Have the patient sit between your crossed hands in sunlight and gently press with olive oil; then apply paper with the oil to your left hand if the eyelids are right-sided or vice versa; then take the tool called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyelids are left-sided or vice versaturally, and turn your hand until it pierces through the edge of the oil to the area below the small outer bend. Pour the almagda into the void space; make sure the passage size of the almagda is at the full width of the space from the plumule to the end of the root; this is the crown's portion of the oil. If you see the bone through the paper for clarity, then place the tool near it or where the water is and gently pull out afterward in a different direction.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water now flows, see the patient before you and the instrument in its place.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting briefly, and the water resumes its second course, use force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise, gently twist slightly by turning your hand a little at a time; then release some mercury into it and heat within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert the oil stopper or wet linen soaked in rose oil and abundant egg yolk, and seal with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, along with those of our time, place a small piece on the wound with an abundance of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	the f.chincre excer they cannot on that he (and so que
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And so, pierce the conjunctiva only slightly, but not too deeply, but rather gently; then insert mercury as we have said; and at the end of the work, prepare for the patient to sleep on their back in a dark place; they should be restrained from all movements, provided with light foods, and do not move their head or left or right, bound according to their disposition until the third day; then remove them into this same dim house, check their vision, show them things, and then reattach the ligament until the seventh day; it is necessary that you perform this not during the curing hour or immediately after incision, but rather before, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess arises, release the oil in front of the seventh day, and apply the remedy to soothe the abscess; and when it is pacified, uncover the eye and place on its face a cloth each day for one or two days, and stay there in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And it gradually leaves the house little by little, and changes into its cases; know that no apprentices should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And it comes the les pains nos de, que tu fai ire oui sentein ce qui en tes, and then let meur si esprendue. Et si l'on est je saient ontes des, et nus liques l’an se eut aque leu mors, ne ceste la, caressons de les. And noit que tu almaies, quant; qui on tesme coi ce i d’ome sis ; et puis conie, ce, que des. Et si esprunt li je est l'en, quoi on le mient, nuns.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the forms resembling almadia, for those who do not recognize them see; and they are of iron properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	The first is the head of this same subtlety, and the third in three angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	From a chariot pulled by two horses
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 At no time do orifices of various sizes appear, from which some resemble many stings like scorpions; and if there are such, with an inflamed red hue, and softened to the bone-colored hue.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case of these joints which are exposed and not enclosed, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; work on its nostrils, and pour the oncinate into those joints, and bend the fingers; then bind what you can grasp at the subtle agut of a thread, until you know that such a joint is completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If any part remains that cannot be covered, apply all subtle and light rubs until nothing is left; if there is swelling or an abscess appears, treat as needed; and if malignant abscesses occur, quickly cauterize so the area becomes sterile and bone fragments are removed, then pour water, egg whites, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not work and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is sane; if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is a joint in the bone above, from which strains do not come to tear: then it must be that you tie a thread of flax a bit thicker, and have it sewn on by us with space between each one; place the child's head through the knot as best they can, and stretch gently until it emerges from within the mouth; this method is often used for children in schools, and it is an easy task for those who know how to do it. Then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and assess each as we are holding the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this as long as you know that the sores have corrupted their skin, then treat the son, drain the blood, and moisten the string with Egyptian salve, and put it back in place; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all that is stuck to the flesh; then apply a plaster of any kind for as many days as needed until healed, and if dry medicines are required, use them; this is the way of the instrument used to purge the head, through which one distills oils and medicine into it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Et sache .iiij. Aime: Et si un peu, se tient : li cheintinse vus est de lais, si que li a li en pui. C'est desu et une plustre fienne d’acue qua estriant l’arme cil, ou quant neist s’en maintes dui unite, qui sont pour ce les cheoir le chauat une et on est ile laquie en faites de boe une a li est prit; si ; et ove eue tient, carpes :
de la char sor le neis	From a chariot pulled by two horses
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease known as "telul" arises at the top of one's neck, growing and becoming large enough to be visible; therefore it is necessary to make an incision from the start, and cut deeply, then apply heat or burning medicine; if not done before it becomes too large, observe carefully if it is hard, has a strange color, and poor sensation: do not use iron as it will worsen into incurable boils with each incision causing great harm to the patient; however, if the boil is from a soft area without discoloration and can be fully covered by an incision, reassure the patient, emptying them of fear, curing dryness and tightening.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck has been cut into
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when continuous bleeding occurs in any of these cartilaginous structures, there is little benefit, even though it happens in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when this occurs in anyone, first examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then join the two lips into a seam and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it must be scraped off all parts of their core as long as they heal, then unite the two lips into one seam, bind it, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and burn incense; and place over the powders a piece of alum stone from a strong or other alum stone until it exudes through itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you join the edges together using needles as described in stitching the abdomen, or with thread as I have shown to you previously.
des apostemes des levres	for abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the treatment of hardened abscesses resembling grains of pepper, both small and large; then it is necessary to return the lips, cut on each side with scissors, take them with forceps and place in each part; then fill the cavity after lancing a blister until the pus stops flowing; and then suture it easily, and treat the filled area of dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	For the erosion of gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often there is erosion on the gums called "albulus" by the ancients; it is necessary to support them with pincers, cut at their root, and let blood or sap flow; then apply vitriol paste or other powders that constrict and dry out; and if the erosion returns after incision, and often does so, a second cauterization may be done: it will not return after cauterization again; these are the forms of treatments to heal.
des sordens	From soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At no time are they gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and sharp; nor do the teeth appear black or yellow with spots until corruption comes to the gums, making them foul-smelling; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his cheeks be in your holy hand, and remove any teeth or splinters found, until there remains nothing; then do so with blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other discolorations, until they are healed; and if anything that was initially removed returns, it is good; if not, start again on the second and third day, until you have completely done so; know that teeth need various forms of treatments to be restored according to what the work shows, because those with which one cleans the root may differ from those found between the teeth; and these forms and others are to be prepared by you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay extraction as much as possible, for it should not always be done; because it is a matter of high importance until there is no justification for pulling out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient's mouth is strained by sucking, one must be sure of the pain in his teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain distressed the patient, and he thought it was a toothache or gum disease, and made him pull out the bad tooth; but nevertheless the pain did not leave because of this, until the wrongful condition is gone, for we have already tried this with such patients. And when you are well sure about the tooth's looseness, it must be scraped around entirely strong to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or pliers subtly at first and gradually, until it is properly aligned; then firmly secure the tooth. The head of the shoulder should be in its rightful place between his joints, ensuring it does not shift.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth completely and breaking it, if it does not break off, take one of these substances and put them inside both parts gently, then move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and infected, it must be filled with wadding where the roots are; gently extracting it with pliers so as not to break when removing; diligently work around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And take good care that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, which will cause the patient greater pain from the severity of the roots.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And take care not to do as ignorant barbers who often break the root due to their haste and boldness without following what we have told you; but they bring about great disease from the roots that remain or from the broken root they cause, just as we have seen often; and when extracting a tooth, wash its socket with wine or olive oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs there frequently, apply powdered vitriol; and if this does not help, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the sinews, to which one may move the bones first, are with long points and large knots, so they do not double when you pull on the thread; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members such that they do not bend while pulling, and made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold when moved.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the bones
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains after grating, it is proper to place a piece of cloth soaked in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 Until the tooth is smoothed, then you insert the pincers called "algofree," which make the head appear as a dentist's drill; and internally they are shaped like a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the skin entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as tongs. This is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And the tongs should be large and strong so that they do not break, and if the root is pulled out by them, it is good. If not, use all the tools, from which these shapes come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help using this instrument that has two tines, here is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And of other instruments before it for examining teeth, and this device which appears like large pincers, here is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument is such that it cannot break easily; there are many instruments for examining teeth; and so are other instruments, which are not counted among them; the wise masters find by themselves their tools, according to their craft's works and the diseases they demonstrate, because there are some illnesses or the old did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of bones and joints, or it does not break on the cart or other bones where they occur; so seek the instruments that I have told you about, and help with gestures, here is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	They should be large and firmly held to hold the bone without slipping, but to grip it and extract; then restore them back with medicines suitable for this, and if there is any decay in the bone where it occurs, and if it's small, all of these instruments are:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not in accordance with the natural course of the body and are unattractive in form, especially in maidens, it is necessary to ascertain if the roots are behind the teeth, and they are neither straight nor properly positioned; then the fissure must be made. If there is an impact with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown here, resembling a small beak, and let it be of iron pointed at one end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping shall be filed bit by bit over several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move other teeth; if it appears that it can be ground down, then grind with a part as shown in this shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like grinding needles; and gently file the tooth bit by bit over several days so that it does not move too much; then smooth out at the end with a fine rasp, and if the root is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must grind down the harshness until they are even, ensuring it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the tooth is loose through knocking or falling out, and the patient cannot press down on what they are biting without spitting out saliva, even after treating with medications that constrict, if such measures do not suffice; then you should use a thread of gold to restrain it, for silver threads turn green and rust over time while gold remains unaffected; the thread's thickness should be neither too large nor too small depending on the space between the teeth; and when straightening the teeth, take hold of the wire, loop it twice around each sound tooth, then place the heads among the teeth if there are one or more, continuing gently until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; after that, resume covering up to where you started pulling.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then grasp the head of the bone with pliers, and join them together, placing them between the healthy teeth, ensuring it does not catch the tongue; then leave it tight enough to remain in place, if it dislocates again, or if the wire breaks, restrain with another wire; it will stay this way throughout its life, resembling the shape of two normal teeth and their proper alignment as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And if the tooth falls out again, put it back in its place freshly as we have said; and do not involve anyone who is neither wise nor patient, and never attempt to form it into a shape like a boar'prise tusk, but fit it where there is an absence, and restrain it as previously stated, and it will serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	From heat, remove the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Never is this kind of joint that comes from beneath the tongue by nature to be made as such; or by accident during a sutured wound; and its workings are so that you treat the mouth of the sickly, with their head in place, lifting the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide enough for the tongue to move away from its resting position, and if there is stiffness or swelling, and it's due to a sutured wound, then apply linen and tie off again on that side; and be careful not to make an incision too deep near the artery below; and once you have done this, raise the red liquid and ice from the wound, then place a linen bandage under the tongue; every night soak the patient's mouth with something mild like warm water or cool water, ensebling they cannot swallow.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 If blood flow occurs, put vitriol paste on the wound; and if it doesn't stop bleeding, then use the spot-cauterizing cautery which is good for this; then treat with another remedy until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be colored or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for this is cancer; and if it begins to ulcerate, and there is moisture, then drip on the hook, and fumigate with a delicate spatulaceous instrument, and release from all sides; and if at your treatment site, apply vitriol paste until healed, then return to the original treatment site as long as you treat everything thoroughly; then elevate cold water compresses and rest, and care for other remedeis till it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 There are no times when 'godath', a term for swollen tonsils, occur in the throat; they are properly called "II amandres", and as we have described in the section on divisions, if they do not heal, take care: if it is an abscess of little sensitivity and soft color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if they are red with the roots being large, do not touch them with iron, also for bleeding; but let it heal until it is scabbed over, and then you will separate them, as they may break on their own; and if they have a pale color and thin roots, prepare the instrument to cut, but first ensure that the abscess is resting and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Once the patient sits before the sun and his eyes in your hands, work on his mouth and pinch the jaws with your fingers, pressing the tongue away from all instruments of which this form is made; it should be silver or fine iron as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess? If it has a stalk, insert an awl into the almond, and pull up more than you can with your hands; then do not touch any surrounding tissue. Then cover the instrument as in the form below [draws] that appears to resemble chains of power, while the head is arched, one end at a time, very painful, made of iron or fine steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use a spatula with tongs like so:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one end and blunt on the other, and when you have opened one of the almonds, open the other in the same manner; after making the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, vinegar, and honey syrup if there is a discharge of blood occurring, then again gargle with diluted pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves until it stops bleeding; then cure them until they are well, as none other sores than the two almonds may appear in the throat, so treat accordingly to remove both almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, which was of little size; and after carefully closing the entire throat, she could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess had grown so large that it was through two openings made by the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 So I quickly did it and inserted one needle, then the tool was turned forcefully, taking a large portion of bone; then I placed another in the other passage without touching the nerves, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards I inserted the needle into these boils, took part out, and only a small amount of blood came out; thus the woman's throat tube was cut, and she began to drink water then wine, and did not stop treating that boil for long periods; the boil would return, filling up the space I had emptied, until it became very large; then I deceived and cauterized inside her throat: so it stopped growing. Afterwards, I left these parts, and only God could do anything afterwards with her.
de l’uve	From the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they are returned to the eye, and it is inflated and elongated, then it should be struck "perpendicularly"; and if it is devoid of thickness and round, then it should be struck "as an egg".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we have described in the division, and the treatment does not work, and you see that the abscess has calmed down but remains subtle, then you should excise it; and if one which is round and not elongated comes together, and is sanguine or of fish-blood color or black, then you must perform an incision into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it as per the manner I have described in terms of blanchness and length, make the patient sit before the sunlight, press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull outwards, and follow the cutting technique at II estrumns that I mentioned for the incision of II almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary that you do not cover the excess beyond its natural end; for if you cover more, it grieves both speech and hearing; after an incision, apply as we have said in the incision of two almonds, and treat until healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient has fear of being covered, it is necessary that you apply an appliance for the cautioning of his sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The method of the caustic burns is often accompanied by acute ague (fever).
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient should place his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have mentioned for caustic burns, moistening it with fresh warm water so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the closure of this instrument as follows. (Note: The translation ends abruptly due to a missing part of the original text.)
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eresemete l’est, quant li mille. 1e de l’amont ceu le est aulme e la chene sont les cite li coupelee parmet ond les metsont li et siqueme ce cue un estremets li cuet. Lui le vemt lemedes dedelez, et li c'est de l’este une fois eme li aloud; andemete l'aveug en l’l.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective with incision than with fire-cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take expectorant and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avon and similar herbs, and mix them all together or some of them in a pot, add water, bring to boil; and the pot well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have an instrument inserted as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it may be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is sclerosed; often repeated, until the vein heals, and ensure not to perform this at the beginning of an abscess's heat increase as many things may occur; and do not perform it just because of a decline in an abscess's heat.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, then take a canal and insert a feather of wax into the head, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; because the wax feather does not hinder the vapor from affecting the mouth, and it is a good cure at the same time.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And many times you cut the throat or spine of a fish bone or any other thing; thus, if it's necessary that you clean the instrument to all over the sun in the body, and squeeze the tongue in the sun under the sun the skin comes out. Also do not and be sung as li is burnt in the stomach; maybe swallowed by vomit, or a piece of sponge, or a morceaude de loin the spat il air anointed, or soak it's drye de leu. And he takes a fil a estrument for sun and sung li le bonnet et as long as is not in the ceste ceu en leaer, si pren liauz, and take .i.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the strum be bent towards the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and lift the head high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that nothing hinders its movement, nor push in any bone within; move such that the patient places the instrument, for it should be loose or where the thing is narrowed; then insert towards the end of the instrument evenly until it is fully inserted.
de la sansue de la gorge	For the swelling of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Never is medicine without suction, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look down the patient's throat with sunlight, and press their tongue against the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see suction, then treat it with all small hooks or delicate pincers like that.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if it does not work, then take a waxed syringe and put it in the patient's throat, then frequently blow into the tube to clear the clog.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if you give the patient water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full jar of cold water and work on the mouth, causing it to swell as if ingested, moving it often with their hand; and as soon as they feel suction, let it flow out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 If it does not come out as we have said, then smolder the patient with tar pitch using the instrument I mentioned for smoke inhalation of the eye; do this many times, for it will take longer to heal.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of smoke inhalation is that you place the pot or where there are coal ashes, and cover it with a cloth perforated at its center, allowing the head of the instrument to pass through; then apply the smoke treatment, and have the patient put their cheek against the opening while closing their mouth so the smoke does not escape but fills the sinus. The sinuses will heal from there, and if it doesn't happen, continue with smoke treatments multiple times; during this time, let the patient experience thirst and consume unclean foods and drinks without water; eventually, they should sneeze out what needs to be removed by following this guidance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument through which you treat the throat is, when it can be seen, similar to curved tongs for inserting into the throat; and resembles a doctor's spoon, with a smooth surface so that anything taken cannot fall out; this is its shape.
li chapistres des apostemes	The form of an instrument like a scalpel and smooth it should not slip off.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many kinds of abscesses, as our memory brings forth here from one and another in this book, and they differ by perforation and cutting; and there are two ways of dealing with it, one being the same and because of its moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for bumps that lie on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For an abscess at the top is different from those at the base, and an abscess on the limb is different from those that arise in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And for abscesses that one should not pierce until they are fully formed, and those that require piercing when ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like an abscess near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses arise near the joints and are left until they ripen, through chance, the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become damaged, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When an abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay perforation until it has ripened, it will harm the main limb; or if it's near the base, then pierce without waiting for full maturity; but only do so when an abscess is almost ripe, far from the base, to avoid premature rupture and allow drainage within.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And if it is meur l'aposteme que cil qui doumeit se li apemes sont la perforation and les mis li autres; or s et doree aseptement, et leas est pluses alés. Et quant il ne de tole du eunpercion ou as, telz apeme si tu l'apetes l'an, et doucues lontemps et meur esme en l’appetie se il les p.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In cases where they burst, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 When an abscess is ripe for incision, you should allow the puncture to remain until digestion is complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it before this, the poison of his wound will run through his body and he is filled with much filth; and perhaps his lips harden and his deep punctures do so too.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscess that is pierced according to the size of their body, as needed by its member.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And you should treat small abscesses with small punctures and large ones with large punctures, as well as multiple fissures depending on the size of the abscess; when dealing with such abscesses or where one must cut into them, cover it and wrap like a shroud once it has become flaccid and limp, just as you would handle an intestine: and for those split in three angles, or punctured like a mushroom's cap, similar to abscesses of the arms; and those with round cuts, other shapes and treatments.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, you must simply puncture it easily; and when the abscess is large and has formed a great swelling, pierce part of it rather than draining all at once during that time; then close up the abscess until the next day, then avoid piercing anything further; do this increasingly more gently each time, until the entire swelling subsides; especially if the patient is weak in constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the abscess may occasionally burst on its own when released from the swelling; in which case the patient might die unexpectedly, and you should not be held responsible.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Discharge this treatment carefully with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, let the wound bleed out, then examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a simple size, dress it with linen or old cotton bandages; and if it's large abscesses with much pus, it must be done that you insert a tent in each one so they come against each other; and if there are parts of the skin chewed around the abscess which have been cut into, it is necessary to fill them with old cotton or linen thread without moisture, until three days; then change it, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If blood flow occurs on your work site, treat with cold and soothing water, and wrap it in soft cloth, placing it upright many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the blood flow continues, treat with care and remedies as mentioned in this book, and if it is winter or the wound or abscess site is very swollen, cover it with moistened tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; if it's summer and the affected area is fleshy, cover it with moistened cloths soaked in water and oil or cold wine and oil, until after three days as we have said; then unbind the wound and drain and treat as necessary until healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is how one should generally approach the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of swellings
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When headaches come from small abscesses, and there are methods that resemble nests like the vulture of a young girl, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have fat and such like hairs with moisture as feathers; and there are others which are hard and pebbled at the root, and there is no doubt if an arrow strikes it contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the operations of amputation are such that you try with every instrument called "intromissor," from which the shape comes later, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they will come out longer than expected.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave it alone; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving until tomorrow; the ones who remain overnight will do so.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And so begin the cotton again, as before, on the second day and third, as long as you are sure it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing until it is well-healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is filled with pus, wash as per this method in the long manner; and drain the swelling, and remove all scabs, and apply all your treatment for milking out the sore where it lies; and if the arrows hinder you, do what I have instructed you previously.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat the abscess if it is pus-filled, and with clipping and scraping as I have instructed you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the swelling over a pus-filled and wet abscess is easier to puncture since there is little blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or their heads there is no moisture, and for such abscesses that I have cut open from an elderly woman; finding the abscess as hard and sharp like a long stone, which could not be broken; and had it been struck by anything, one would also have made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or their heads, those that come from the children's and roots of ears, the opening should be done as soon as possible at a suitable spot to allow the pus to escape; and treat them as required.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas (tuberculous swellings)
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times occur these abscesses in the neck and beneath the ears, and sometimes in the elbows, and never come to other parts or limbs, and they are very numerous and interconnected with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each swelling is properly due to density in its location, as we have discussed with the lumps and abscesses on the head; and the appearances of these swellings are numerous.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others which harbor malicious intentions not willing to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that case where you see good condition at the touch, and it appears as a normal color of the body, and feels uniformly without being thin on the veins or arteries, and is not deep; then one must copiously scrape from above, and peel each part, extending two crescent-shaped cuts in the gum line if necessary, as we have discussed with abscesses on the head; and proceed slowly but surely, being careful to avoid scraping the nerve or vein, and ensuring that there is no spasmolytic agent nor sharp pain, allowing the hand not to slip, and do not go too far, only scrape what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 If you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then apply vitriol paste to the wound or any powders that remain in the blood, and strain the wound; leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound softens, and begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the wound heals, return to your work until completed; then follow up with your required method if there are no small scrofulous swellings, and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, do not cut out that swelling at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang freely without harm; then treat the wound with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you remove the entire abscess, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and sew them together, without any excess due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is necessary to drain its root, squeeze out fluid, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For those abscesses that have excess fluid, pierce where the end is hardest; and pierce as was previously mentioned, depending on it, then dress with ointment and such things, if they become infected from stagnation; and once the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment soak until healed.
de squinance	If you cut open where it should be applied cleansed by cauterization, ensuring anoint with Egyptian things so it to remain uncorrupted remains from decay; and then thoroughly cleaned, which applies healed apply ointment until once is the infection. And when it is healed after the wound, ensure that open-do not asewoven as they are infected, then corrupted heal with salted before.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and told of the treatment for a throat condition; but I have never seen it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with swollen throats, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglote" be made; and this cannot be helped because all the veins and the main artery causing great heat in an abscess are present therein, either in the mouth or in the throat or in two limbs.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is on the main artery's channel, it is necessary to expose the epiglute so as to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, it should be split from below three or four rings or with a small slit through, between two rings or by the quantity of the slit on either side; and if those edges are suitable for splitting the epiglottis, there is no perforation, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is fearful, it must be extended with a strip of skin from the throat along the entire line, then divide the flesh until reaching the cartilage; and remove any blood clots if you see anything, and then sew up the wound as we have said; and proven by the section through the membrane of the cartilage which bursts open where it is broken, and due to voice loss; leave the open wound exposed.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound above, and pull all flesh together with a cord; then administer medicines that generate heat until it becomes healthy again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	s; prud::
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then sew the epiglote so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and it is commanded to leave the open wound until the effects of the illness have passed, which takes three or four days; then they command to stitch the wound and cleanse it until healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a maiden took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I went to be called for help, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come from it; however, she hadn't used wine or any other remedy to treat her throat, and life-force was flowing out through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried, stitched the wound, and treated her until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maiden except that she had a hoarse voice afterwards, and returned to normal; so from this, I say that in treating the epiglottis there is no cause for fear.
de la grosse gorge	In the case of a large swelling on the throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These boils are called "throat hernia," and they are large abscesses the color of jet, mostly in women; there are two ways: natural and accidental; the former does not have a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 The accident occurs in two ways, one similar to pus and the other is like an abscess that comes from us through arteries; there is fear, and it should not be worked on with force except in those that are small, and try and search thoroughly: if you find it as we do with pus, and does not lead to any vein, then cover it, as one binds wounds, and treat the area completely, if there are points; examine well and heal as necessary until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways we have, of which I will say all the resemblances; and now it is necessary for me to tell you everything that differs between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	the it:
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With this one there is no chills or fever or pain, and contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and it begins like a small piece of lead, and becomes larger; and they are similar to two appearances, either grains or moisture, and much of the color as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the care of our nose that you examine and inquire firstly about all the instrument called "entromissory", according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the method of inquiring into boils is to grasp or get more moisture where you find it in the boil, and turn your two fingers gradually until you know that the swelling has felt the core, then according to the size of the boil; then extract the intruder, but be careful not to squeeze too hard.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture flows in a vein, observe its color as I have described for other abscesses; and if after the incision no moisture comes, know it is fatty, then treat accordingly with cross-shaped incisions, take hold of the edges, and lightly scrape from all sides while protecting where it lies to ensure a healthy wound with clean tools; and if you cannot render it healthy, cut into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, it returns many times; and if it lingers a bit without causing pain, apply the wound with some corrosive ague powders, tighten the wound, and put on soothing substances for abscesses hot, and heal as necessary until healthy; and if they are large, cut along two edges of the wound, and treat it like that which inhibits pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it is inflamed or something else, and you hastily apply the lew of vitriol paste, and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound heals, then let the sanguineous exudation rest; afterwards return to normal as soon as possible.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Look at the forms of intertwined intestines, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them there are three sections called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and among these there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulae; they are like the needles used in sorcery, and made of citrus wood, or iron, or silver, those moved by hand are valued as yellow ones, and more tested for treating black biles of fistulae; there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the channels.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of bone tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two growths in three types each; and those with three growths, and all in three forms; and those with two growths, and one type only, and also in three forms; and all these must be present at their location.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The leading types of these are cutting-edge ones, and among them are those that only cut from one side, which we scrape the nerves with, so veins or nerves cannot be tied off; and among these insertion devices are repositioned in channels, such that patients do not perceive it when abscesses open up; and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you see here; and they are only used at the site of attachment, like legs, arms, nipples, corners, and other similar places; and never made is any other small instrument resembling fistula scrapes according to this form in which blood is blocked.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at the right position without harming veins or arteries, and does not return according to this particular form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 At no time do the nipples of any men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swoln, and whoever wishes to treat them should according to this form of line b. jusques a g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with a medicated poultice of charcoal, then stitch together the two edges of the wound; and if the nipple inclines downward, it softens due to its size as in women, creating two splits above, through two resembling fissures; so that one is held against the other at the end of each, with the larger line containing the smaller according to this form from line b. up to line g.; then scrape the skin between the two edges and remove the fat, and treat as we have said for stitching and powders, and everything necessary in the treatment until it is healed; if it is not healed or the incision has not been properly made because the patient doesains resting, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until the remaining tissue and fat are reabsorbed, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from under the ankle are ways of hard scrofula, and if any contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	the most of:t;
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like those of hard swellings, treat them as we have said in piercing hard swellings, and if the wound is filled with pus, prepare a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	For stopping the bleeding from an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is exposed, and the skin surrounding it becomes hardened, there are often multiple abscesses; similarly, the vein may also become inflamed and abscessed. If one sees a lump for the artery, then the abscess will be fully formed; and when you feel it with your fingers, it is very painful; if it's in the vein, the discharge appears repulsively; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is near the bones and joints or has spread extensebly and grown greatly.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary to clear the treatment of iron, and those who are chief must also be cleared, and in those whose arteries have burst above the long skin; then work on the belly with lancets, and gently remove the vein from its bonds; then insert a needle below it, and pierce the vessel until reaching the other side, and pull the vein through with a double thread in two lengths, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are on temples; then point the location which is between the two bindings with an intermission until the pus comes out, and be discharged from the abscess; then make ready the bandage so it bleeds, until healed; and if the abscesses are by the vein's edge, one must hold to his hand what can be seen of the abscess over all the skin, then insert a needer below this location in your hand, and pierce, and have two lengths of thread, so that you drag it from the other side; then tie off the abscess as I told you, or bind one part with both ends of the doubled thread; and if you doubt whether the threads are tight enough, place another needle across all threads at the incision site of the first needle, and draw the strings in four lengths; then seal the abscess until surplus matter comes out, then cope with the excess flesh and leave what is bound; then put a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with bandages and ointments until healed.
des apostemes des ners	For abscesses with veins.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abcesses come in arteries and veins, they occur when hit or through excessive work or similar causes.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This occurs more often with shoulders and elbows in any limbs where there are joints, it's severe bruising, its color seems the color of the body, and in various conditions causing pain; and when forcibebly straightened, they feel severe pain, not only throughout the body but also behind the head; it moves well from all sides, neither forward nor backward, upward nor downward; those with joints do not need to be covered by iron: sometimes there would be contraction; and those who are at the top or forehead, form a crinkle on the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bruises are small, use tweezers and cover them at their root; if they are large, suspend it by the ring, scrape off the skin, then bone and stitch the wound closed, and care for it until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	de, t, and they are c.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Never does it occur elsewhere but in the belly, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, with subtle roots, and large stems; there are both small and very large ones; I have seen individuals who had two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference, they were white, had fine roots, and were segmented, always filled with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I emptied them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six pounds, with treatments including incision where you should observe if the patient is moist, the color of the artery is pale and moist with fine roots; then cut to the stump wide, and have the fire cautery present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Intoxications occur from blood loss many times due to bleeding, and if it is not stopped, then quickly use a cauterizer; and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of incision with iron, take well-made linen thread, and tie off the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then release, and continuously keep squeezing the linen cord until it stops the bleeding, causing pain to him; and if the roots are large, be careful when clamping his belly with a buckle, but cover most of it well, then cauterize so it does not reopen; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cauterize the vein which is of dark color, weak pulse, and pale appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an incised syphilitic sore, and I shall come for its treatment in the next chapter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound has healed completely
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the boil comes from wound placement or splitting of the sack, and is on the belly with some boils elsewhere, as it happens in other places, or blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or swelling; and if it's due to the splitting sack and discharge of pus, then its color resembles that of the body, and it is a mild thing without pain, open through various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then there are various issues, and when pressure is applied on its sides, it may rebound, then return, and sometimes becomes hardened, significantly enlarging at the entrance and requiring considerable effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to moisture, it is a mild thing and well open when you press with your hand, without holding; and if it's because of blood, then the boils are large and hard according to an amount, and they stand out; and if it's swelling, it is tender upon touching, and the treatments should be observed to see if the appearance suggests being from artery or vein blood, or swelling.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to let the healing process continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the condition is for the intestines or bowels, you should instruct the patient to tie their anal area and stretch it straight out, then girdle them all around with a belt; next command the patient to lie on their back between your hands, then work the entire length of the abdomen that you have marked out, extending half of the abscess above the great vein; then bind it entirely with a strong thread or cord made from sturdy silk firmly, and provide them with solace for this tie; next operate on the extended portion of the abscess above the girdle, and insert your instrument there, and seek out the intestine; if you find it caught by the gardline, release it, then insert the intestine through the anus towards the lower abdomen; and if you find a bladder, take hold of its excess, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery behaves adversely, or the vein, go lightly around, then return to your work area and select two needles, and insert them through their tips, and sew up with strong thread, and put on the needle points where you have previously pierced a cross that you made; then draw out the abscess in four locations above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound to dry until it heals over, and extract any dead tissue by yourself; or cut away when it becomes delicate and softened, then treat as we have told you; and extract blood or moisture that you find, then cure the abdomen according to what is necessary, and cleanse the abscess as I have described;
dou chancre	For the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the appearances of ulcers and how to treat them with medicine, and purging therapy; we now speak of the ulcer that occurs within bone tissue, requiring great caution for its treatment, and ancient texts say that when an ulcer is present or can be reached as if it were a sore in the breast, thighs, or other areas, one should remove it entirely at first occurrence; and when they are large and old, do not approach them because I have never seen any healed; nor has anyone been known to be cured of this before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	the ev
de ydropisie	De l'hydropisie
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 In the division of similarities to dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and signs for each type, and the treatment made with medicines, and that which is treated by iron; these are only those that erupt. One should not use iron in these two types: tympanitis and hyposarcoma, as it's a deadly matter; so when you treat this dropsy-like condition called 'eclites' with medicines and the treatment does not work, check if the patient is weak or has another disease besides drops^3. If there are symptoms of bowel disorder or other similar conditions, do not use iron as there may be doubt; but if you see a strong patient suffering only from dropsy without being too young or old, then act accordingly: raise the patient on your hands and have an assistant press their abdomen, pushing the water to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spatula-like instrument in this manner.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And use sharp instruments of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And use sharp instruments with two parts; one pointed and the other blunt, such that it cannot pass all the way to the intestines when inserted deeply. Then check if dropsy is related to the intestines: if so, make an incision above the navel on the right side of the body. And if it's due to liver disease, then cut to the left; and if from moisture, to the right. Ensure that the patient lies on the incision site so no excesses flow there weakening them. Then puncture all through the skin with the instrument, inject, and remove your hand completely filling the space between the skin and fascia just as in lancing for a pinch or near it; then pierce the fascia until you reach the fluid level, then guide the vessel outward, and insert this tool whose form is shown here.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is like a silver thread delicate, and of hair or wisp light, in the part below the small eyelet; and when it approaches one side, three eyelets; and two on another side, and one on the other; and the head cut so as with a feather pen, and that is the shape of the incision which the writers carve the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top above is the artery, and when the pus comes to the water, then insert now into the instrument; empty thereafter a half or a third part, for if you empty more than necessary at that hour, by chance it may kill the patient due to the resolution of their spirit from the weapon, whereby they have palpitations, or come close to death; but empty according to one's strength, and according to what the conditions of the strength of the sickly signify, and their hair. Then pull out the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by a stopper that plugs the hole that is above the socket, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering such things, and draw out some small quantity of fluid; do this each day, but be cautious not to overfill too much at a time.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 If you doubt about the patient and leave him with much water, treat by burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing in the sun, and dye with drink; cure with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Concerning the interruption of the member (the penis).
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Not once is a child born who does not have foreskin on the penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary that he should be circumcised very soon according to this subtle method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then take the subtle foreskin and tie it off in this manner: on day one or two to four, and when he needs to urinate, open the slit, let him pass urine, and then reset; however, sometimes there is no need, because the urine passage that remains does not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 Those with a hernia who are asked to undergo this treatment will find relief as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the hernia in its proper place are afflicted, for none arise with the hernia at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot engage because the matter cannot reach the testicles, which is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, so raise the head of the penis and wrap it as with a pen's beak, so that the spur cuts into the flesh where needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, then cauterize the area from which blood is coming.
des pustules de la verge	From pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these abscesses come in the penis and have an unsightly appearance; there are both harmful and non-harmful ones; it is necessary to pick them with a fine needle, cleanse and purify all of them, then apply cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment; continue to treat with this ointment until healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is malignant, of foul color and draining, it is necessary that you perform a fire cautery there.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 After you have coped it, and if the abscess is inward with part of the penis inside flesh and part outwards, it must be that you remove the abscess within first; and once solidified, treat the outer part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat it together, make sure the head of the penis is not pierced and darkness and decay come to its shaft; then address all that is blackened and corrupted, afterwards place on a plaster of honey and flour made from green-gold skins and veils, then cure with other treatments until it is healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, prepare the lunar cautery in this way:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery has two uses together: that is, for bleeding and decay, and if the head of the penis is corrupted and receded, it is necessary to put or guide a tube from the penis into the male's urine; and when the hair at the top of the penis becomes mossy as in those who have not been circumcised, whether for injury or abscess, then indeed you must scrape it with a sharpened instrument until the ligaments are released, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a grievous matter to discuss such things, then you should lightly scorch just slightly at the top of the penis and hair; then carefully separate between them, and place a subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water that it does not dry out completely.
de la circoncision	On circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the majority of masters and scholars who performed circumcision within one day, and in strong health; it was beneficial as there were two types, and sometimes either type would be chosen at random.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	It is regained with cupping, and the pain is doubled, and in the examination which is to see if there is no doubt about the point of the limb; and in the cleaning of the nail by chance it escapes the iron, and blood flows, and many times this happens so that they do not need cleaning and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the examination that is done at the extremities of the limb, I have found the goodness of experimentation, for the forces cut exactly as above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, cut evenly throughout all efforts; but the child must be tightened around the hide; and it should be like the first procedure so that you make the child think if he understands, that you do not hurt him only tie the thread around his penis briefly, then let him breathe in all ways possible; then keep it straight between your hands, and return the strength from your hands or below your feet where the child does not see anything, nor any signs; then place your hand on the rope and blow or shout, and raise it up until the head of the rope is out; then cleanse thoroughly of the filth that has accumulated, then tie the knot with a double thread, then tie below one hole to another loop; and hold them with two strings by the pouchet and index finger, and tie between the two loops, then lift the head gently and turn the head of the rope; then let some blood drip little by little, for it's necessary; and put powder on and over the powder a mixture glued from half an egg cooked with pink water, mixed with good fresh oil rose, and leave it until the next day, and heal with another treatment as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for cleansing is this: both heads are to be held and sharp; and they are as large as a mule equally. (This seems like an incomplete sentence or possibly a metaphorical instruction.)
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the swelling is when the kernel inside escapes through the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it with your fingernail so that the core makes an abscess; and wrap it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use tweezebo
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it passes three days and what is below the staff is swollen, leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and gently scrape off; wrap as you normally would, and avoid touching the area of the staff, as it will not harm or hurt at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the sudden wound filled with powder is treated as we have said about treating powders, and if you wrap too much of it and it goes beyond, it will not hurt; treat accordingly as we have instructed, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to stone obstruction, frozen blood, or bowel, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not pass and you see there is a blockage from a stone lodged at the urethral opening or neck of the bladeback, lean the patient on their knees; place their feet up on the back, stretch their abdomen towards the upper back, and restrain them as much as possible. Then constrains the bladder neck to expel the stone from above, causing urine flow; if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with a tool called "catheter," which has this form: made of fine silver wire, about half the length of an ostrich feather's quill, and the outer diameter is about one palm long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method for the removal of urine is that you take a double strand of thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton at each end; then place one head of the filament inside the syringe; cut off any excess wool or cotton, leaving enough to reach the top of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and almond oil until it is evenly coated; have the sick person sit on a stool, and apply oil from an ointment made of oil, butter, and almond juice to their bladder and penis until they are moist, then gently insert the syringe into the penis up to its base near the root, then twist the syringe towards the belly; next fill the syringe with urine from the blad groove and let it flow out of the syringe as you feel the sick person's relief; this is not done according to this order for the reason that where the conduit goes may be twisted; then pull on the thread little by little until all wool has come off, extracting the urine; repeat filling and emptying the syringe until the bladder is completely emptied, providing relief to the sick person.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or when gangrene is present, and you see it necessary to distill waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument called "claspdrue": this is its form.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and if it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the body part above which the medicine cortex is placed so that it thoroughly fills the vessel without addition, if moisture can be expressed, and inserted where needed; and when you see medicines flowing into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and pull on the tube that lies within; thus expressing moisture through the catheter, then firmly reinsert the tube; moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladader now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of enema used to irrigate the bladder: such is it.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; and from below at his neck where the ligaments tear apart; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture to flush out the bladder; then tie a good double filament thread between both breasts forming, and heat it over fire; then pour the moisture into the clyster tube, then strain your hand around the bladder allowing all the moisture to enter until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle on it, and pierce it roundly through; then put a strong thread in these holes, then join the circle as one would assemble leather, and fill it with what you see oil, moisture, and water, and tie it inside the instrument; and do so as with the bladder, squeeze by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	for stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have explained in the division how to remove stones and medicines together; and we mentioned the difference between a stone at its beginning as rain, and all signs, and which kind of stone one must operate on by cutting; and about the bladder, and about the penis; and I will now tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which begins in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water of the bladche leaps like spring water; and there are sandy deposits, and the male feels an urge to urinate, and does so many times before becoming inflamed; and from these jumps, the foundation becomes weakened; and for young children up until four years old, it is very painful in old age, moderate as those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment of those with larger stones is easier than that of those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to expel all the filth that is within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it never causes any obstruction of stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and stand him up, moving them apart so that the stone descends to the front of the bladebag, and does not rise higher; then let him sit between your hands arranged, with his hands behind his thighs so that the bladder is fully inclined downward; then grasp and touch within; if you feel the stone in place, hasten now to cut above it.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not come out with the probe at once, grease your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is young or middle-aged, and the middle finger if he is older; insert it into its foundation, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, squeeze near the neck of the bladebag; then press above your finger, and push out whatever remains wherever you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and instruct them to extend the fingers upward with their right hand, and to remove the skin below the fingers in the area where you make the cut; then they apply a binding cloth generously enough for its shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And insert between those who are between the hips and the base, not too far but to the left side of the nape; and be right above the stone, and your thighs should both go together or apart from the base, and adjust its length so that it is wide at the bottom by default, and narrow inside according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps press if there are stones present where the thigh meets the base, they will exit without effort; and know that there may be parts with angles or borders: these should come out easily; and like those that are stuck together, similar to a ring, round, from which it can be released easily.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 Where there are angles and borders, make the tube larger; and if it does not come out, then you must use pliers similar to a file at the top, in order to extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or place a subtle instrument with a curved tip on top; and if you cannot manage this way, slightly widen the opening, and if the substance breaks off, strain with white vitriol; and if there are more stones, first address the largest at the bladder neck, then cope them out one by one, then the larger ones, and afterwards any remaining small ones.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then one must wait for it to subside, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For there are two things that happen to the patient: they die or urine comes out again as the bladder cannot seal up; however, always make an effort with the drainage or debridement using forceps, until you have drained by pieces; and after complebing your work, dress the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, along with sutures, and put a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rose water (or cold water) to cool down the abscess; then loosen the bandage on the patient's neck and leave it until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, well anoint the wound with oil and water, then treat it with finished myrrh ointment and basilisk ointamoistened with clear water until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 When abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and congealment of blood in the bladder, with urine being held due to this reason, known as passing without salt with the urine: therefore strike your thumb into the wound, extract that blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will be affected, and the kidney; then cleanse the wound of water and ease and swelling, and aid in all ways you know, until healed; and ensure that all bandages you apply are tied around both thighs, and assemble medicines at its place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the stone is small and it leads from the gland, and stuck in place, and urine cannot pass; treat as I say hereafter, that you may size it many times with a catheter.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron fork according to this shape, with three prongs bent at one end into a tine.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a fil and wrap it around the staff underneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently insert the probe into the shaft until it reaches the stone; turn the probe slowly in your hand at the stone bit by bit, as long as you can pierce the other side of the stone; soon the urine will come out, then press your hand where any part remains within the shaft inside.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is soon broken and comes out with the urine, and the patient recovers; if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, then wrap a filament underneath the stone and another above, then make the shaft where the stone lies between two ligatures, then extract the stone forcefully, and loosen the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is sound.
de la piere des femmes	Of women with stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones occur in women and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult for three reasons: firstly, because there may be a woman who is a virgin; secondly, one cannot find a skilled female who can undress at the baths, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 In the third manner it is that by chance you may not find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that if the stone from the woman is more embedded than the stone from the man, so one must make a deeper incision with great fear involved. And if necessary steps are required therein, then you should enlist an experienced midwife without cost, and if you do not find one, seek out a very skilled wise woman or a woman who knows part of the art, commanding her to perform what you require for stone extraction; and ensure that the woman is a virgin. Then it is necessary for her to position herself properly or kneel down, searching firmly for the stone; if she finds it, she must be constrained away from her privates and advised to hold them close or with the patient's hand on top of their belly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is protruding, then gradually move it from the beginning of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then turn on the stone at the thigh's root against the flesh where it becomes visible, and feel for the stone in that area; do not rotate your thumb above or below the stone, and make the first small incision; then insert a probe into the opening. If you sense the stone so that you can extract it fully, recognize that there are many types of stones: they can be small or large, sharp or smooth, long or round, with veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know what to expect regarding its outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If the stone wins out, then apply saltpeter paste to its location and hold an hour until it is firmly fixed; then return to your work as long as the stone remains strong, and use the dressings I have told you about for home help in your endeavor during stone extraction; if the stone prevails again, and it's from a vein that has burst, apply powder at its location and wrap tightly with bandages and bindings, do not attempt this further, let the stone remain and do not manipulate it unless by chance the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood has subsided and strength returns to the patient, return to your work with stones as long as they are strong enough.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia of fleshly growth
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	It is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white scab, which is under the surface of the skin that contains pus; and it's called "scab," and never properly in the tissue of the skin if one believes it to be another thing; and it's the leather part between the white scab we have mentioned, and nothing else occurs.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this carbuncle is due to weakness that affects the veins, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 At no time does it come from the percussion on the joints, and this moisture appears in many colors: some are yellowish in decline, or without color, black, or watery white; these signs occur frequently to identify this assembly, as if it is similar to what we have described before, then it is a swelling resembling an egg's shape with short fingers and does not open the joints because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If there is moisture in the wound itself, it forms an abscess with part of the fat, and because of this one believes it is another organ; and if the moisture is between the skin layers and the fascia, it feels quite well; therefore, when you want to determine the color of the moisture, try rubbing all around the involved area.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	After this examination, judge what lies within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be laid flat on their back for as long as possible and ensured body warmth; then they should lie on one side, placing plenty of linens under them, and command the attendant to stand opposite, extending the rod towards one of the two ribs behind where the shoulder meets the chest; then take a spatula-like instrument, carefully cut through the skin lengthwise up to the wrist, making an incision cleanly as much as you can manage, and puncture the flesh directly until reaching white fascia, draining all fluid out without touching the ribs but only the fascia; excise either in one piece or piecemeal carefully ensuring a neat cut, if not done properly, fluid will return; and if the fat bulges due to your work, have them resettle in their original position once you've completed the incision on the fascia; then suture together the two edges of the chest as with other wounds until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie off the vessels that are dilated, checking for blood loss; then cut the collarbone at its entire length and extract the joint as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 If the bone is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; join the other part as you did with the first equally, then let out blood, and apply linen soaked in rose oil to the wound; place another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put over both joints, and above doubled cloths, and lay a lie across all the ligaments according to this method.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two cloths and place chopped wool according to this design, sewing them together around the groin of the trousers; one end of the head goes up to the base until the back, and the other to the part by the elbow; the other two heads are placed on both arms, and all are secured in the loop of the braier; and this cautery medicine method should not be used as a foot-rule iron cutter, but take a delicate incision tool, prepare the skin over the joints, and soak it as we have instructed, such that the white matter containing blood is exposed; then use the cutter according to this design, pierce the vessels where knots are found, and scrape with this hot small cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 In all ways of dressing as you understand them, until you are certain; and ensure the fire does not touch the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and with careful attention to blood flow, and wards against swellings from incisions; and if anything contrary happens, such as abscesses or bleeding or other things, then treat what goes against it, according to what has been previously said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrifying nature, prepare as I tell you a perforation, just as I say; and ensure that when you are well informed by the meanings we have said that resuscitating water is laid, make the sick person sit on a chair raised up; then pierce the abscess in the area below all of the tissue widely spread out, and place the perforatur within long body cavities so they're fully open; and let there be wide openings for the water flow to be strong; then put cotton over it, bind it tightly, and allow the rest of the water to drain off, after which you treat until the wound is healed; and if a bandage doesn't let the water out through the opening in the wound, it must be that you insert a pen or an instrument used for treating bladder stones as mentioned above; then enlarge the wound slightly, know that the water returns, and gathers after six months or so, and when gathered again just as before, thus will pass through the sick person's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	If I; The old. Do not ca: f (st et les tous la:fle t ; they: c
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In this part of the treatise on fear and various conditions, it seems best to leave things as they are; and I will tell you about the procedure and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	But I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the knee joints, and this is due to numerous cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is known by excessive bitterness and coldness that has spread to the joints or from percussion; and the color of the abscess corresponds with the body's natural color; there is no pain, but it is a severe abscess; and sometimes there are frightening and piercing abscesses with discolored hues, never originating from our arteries or vein inflammamoition.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from our artery, it is known by the hot abscess's condition when you press with your thumbs; and it should not be touched at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 The one with inflammation of veins is recognized by his tendency to express pain upon touching the joints, and he can well perform circumcision on this type, as well as others; and cut out the core of the scrotum, then extend it upward, and treat the white thread (vas deferens), and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the scrotum.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the scrotum is already swollen with these mentioned lumps (hydroceles), then it is necessary to treat the scrotum and remove them; and if there are stones in the vas deferens or within the blood vessels, one must release all that tissue completely, and roundly excise.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of a child is at or behind there, one must encompass it fully and extract the afterbirth as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are complete, dress the wound with fine cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then attend to other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	If I; The old. Do not ca: f (st et les tous la:fle t ; they: c
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess wrapped in a swelling resembling a burr, with the softening of tissues, and it causes the patient to move anxiously when approaching; and the cure for this disease is as fearful as that mentioned earlier, and nonethebout we will tell you the treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a stool, then apply the suspensory to his knee joints below both thighs, along with all tendons close to the shin, and strain them tightly; then cover the sharp spatula broad over the entire length of the veins, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side as we have said in extracting arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle where it has double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vision came, and securely to the other end; then cut across centering according to the length of the body, and remove any corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with bowing ointments, so that no vein swells on either side; for by this, there is no harm, and if blood comes to all vessels, it is necessary to drain both sides.
de la routure dou syfac	From the nature of its use
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The outcomes of this treatment are by the method that comes from incision or fistula, or extension on the stomach in the part of the arms, so the intestines protrude through one of the openings; and this opening is either from a fistula or from the extension, and these two ways come from various causes: by percussion, jumping, screaming, lifting heavy weight, etc.; and the signs when it's an extension due to a fistula are that they occur little by little over a long time and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the front, because the fistula hastens the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	When the signs appear as though it is of a severed sphincter, it causes sudden pain at the beginning and various abscesses appearing from under the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body near the recently severed sphincter.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never are the winds with the intestines, and they become lodged inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of iron that cause fear, it is necessary to excrete them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 In this method of the operation it is so that you command or sickly to move the intestine into its place within the wound if possible; then gently stretch above its neck between your hands and lift the cheeks; then extend the head upwards, and cover all the skin around completely with fat from the hocks as needed for opening the wound, using ones that allow the eyes to come out; then scrape off the lard beneath the skin of the hock until the bare flesh is exposed throughout; then insert your index finger where it should be based on what you need to open the wound, in between the white fat that is beneath the skin and the second piece, separating the area behind the femur, lifting all fat towards the hand with which you work the head. Command the assistant to stretch the femur upwards, and between the first and second white fat pieces; then move each cheek outwards using your right hand on the head's sides, and raise the entire lard towards the left hand, pointing it back towards the body; after that, pull apart all fat from within the neck. If you find any intestine wrapped in or hard white fat, pierce with a needle if needed, and tie off at the belly below; then take a thread made of three strands, and sew up behind it. Afterwards, where knots appear due to these threads, remove all but four filaments leaving them aligned as before, then tie all lard together using one strong line from both sides; next cover with remaining threads securely so no leftover fats remain inside that could cause an abscess; and finally, attach the first thread according to the length of your index finger.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the facial gland cauterized as we have said, after incising, due to concern about blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens and leave the ligament to shrink on its own; and if it is delayed in healing, apply warm water, and do as we have said, until it shrinks; then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healthy again.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia of fleshly growth
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this treatment, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a ram's horn attached to the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels after cutting near the bone gently at the end; then bandage tightly, and treat the abscess from which blood flows until the vessels shrink; and cure as we have said, until it is completely healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Never comes pain at the ankles, as we have said, and open the eyes; and do not let any of the intestines come out through the joints, and if they do, it is little, and heals within hours; nonethebie, cure with a caustic method until the intestines protrude because of the swelling in the joints, as we have said, for they are extended, then softened and inflamed, causing the eyes to open widely and become reddened; then treat them as before by using a caustic agent. And this cure is not done with iron like so: when the patient lies on their back between your hands, bandage the swollen area wide according to the quantity of three fingers; then extract the fistula that protrudes from beneath the skin, then take the thread and place it over the wound, then press gently at its center, then tie both visible wounds near the head end of the string, tying one after another; then remove the knot end of the string. Do not cover the fistula nor extend any other part, as I have instructed you in the treatment for intestinal hernias by the method we discussed earlier; then cure it with normal wound care methods.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bind the wounds, if it becomes inflamed and treat the injury, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is restricted and does not appear during examination, and the cauldrons are more effective in this place, closer to recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints is softened in some men because the cartilage within them is also softened, and it appears milky; and when one wants to treat this, make the patient lie on their back with the affected area exposed, and cut off the mollified skin from the natural skin; then sew together the two edges into a single stitch, and if you see any excess mollified skin, do so at three or four sturdy sutures; then close between the sutures as you would with other wounds, until it is healed, and let the thread come out.
dou chastrement	From softening of the joints
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 It is said that strangling is outlawed in our law, and I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, it is necessary for two reasons: one is so the physician can respond when asked and provide treatment; and the other, because we often need animal restraints such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say that strangling is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its joints are softened and pliable; then grasp with your hand, making sure they return to their place and you no longer feel them move.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 From the treatment of cutting: it is necessary to take hold of the animal, and press its skin with your left hand's leather thong, then tie the suspender, and cut above each joint after you have properly scraped them; leaving no trace of deep or subtle sores on the limbs; this method of cutting treatment is more effective than that made by attraction because in attraction it may happen nothing remains at the joints so the beast desires lust. Then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are those who possess both male and female sexual characteristics.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphrodite occurs in two ways: one where between the two joints it resembles as much as possible the shape of a woman's body, and sometimes there is no urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 The other manner is among women, where it ascends to the wrist like a rod and two cones.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of men and women is that you drain all the swollen veins, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the skin near the biceps, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	From tension and strain
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Efflorescence is a swoln vein on the natural part, so much that it's too unsightly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You must treat the excess of efflorescence on your hand or elbow and bleed it gently; do not let blood flow too copiously, so as to prevent further loss of blood, then continue with another treatment until it is healthy again; and for a vein that arises at the mouth of the muscles, and the arm, and possibly leaks profusely, and is similar to a cow's udders, hence they called the ancient "cowpox".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to attempt, as we have said in our experimentation, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	too shall beco for la; et se, ould on l’s avgite le pere ce que est les ranc:
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of woman is not well perceived or her breasts are small; it is inherent by birth or due to an illness that has come upon them, or it's caused by chronic ulcers or insect bites and forms fully in the thighs, hips, buttocks, or any place, preventing conception, childbirth, and possibly having hair, with knowledge of this being gained through observation of the pubis.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If swelling is present early on, whether near the knee or thigh.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a subtle syphilis, and the swelling has been present for two weeks or so, act swiftly: place both index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back with legs spread apart; then separate both fingers fully until the syphilitic sores are gone, and cover the swelling. Then take wool and pulverized egg yolk mixed in oil, and apply it to the area, then lay the woman head-to-toe each day so that healing can occur.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the socket is hard and narrow, it must be cut with a saw resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the hernia is of a flat nature, support it with bandages and cut; then apply healing blood-cleansing medicines such as unguentum, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance mixed with oil; afterwards prepare a wide bandage so that the wound does not close up; thusly keep it long-term, and dress the area with linen cloth once dried; then treat other remedies until healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when there is a hernia of a flat nature, it must be covered as in this manner unless the swelling turns into progressing abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 When an abscess is inflamed within the bone, one must not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	For hemorrhoids: use wool soaked in wine and apply to the area; then rub with a mixture of frankincense, myrrh, and rosin mixed generously with oil; keep doing this until well-healed.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Edema is an unusual swelling of veins that are not accustomed to it, and when edema becomes old and hardens; in the section where I have explained their appearances and signs, I will now say those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that edema and hardened tissues when they are fully within the bone, do not show any signs to touch, except for treatment by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the bone, which one can feel, are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the hardened tissue with pincers, and cover it at its roots, then powder with medicines that restrain blood flow, such as dragon's blood and incense among other things; then apply poultices to her skin for an hour, then place her in cold water; if bleeding resumes, she should sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gallnuts, and similar substances, and then take wheat flour, confections with honey and oil, and wrap it around her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it becomes locked, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 And if not, apply cups on the back and to the temples as though they are bruised; then take linen, and mix the hair with nettle or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it at the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess is healed, treat it with ointment until it's sound; and that which has been appeased "alabathir" is red and similar to a rough edge as I have said in the tale; then care for it until it is sound.
des apostemes de la marris	From abscesses of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscesses come in the groins, such as cancer and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, erysipelas, syphilis, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Thus it is necessary to describe in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs on the muscle, which is not just an abscess of those that swell with boils; and if you know how to do surgery, then observe whether the abscess is acute at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when seen.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not rush to incise it, but let the pain be eased before making a cut; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats for him to recline, and support his back and bring together the parts of the leg that are farther away; and ensure his thighs are spread apart, and place his arms below his knees, and tie them well with good ligaments; then turn his body towards the right side, and arrange the instrument used to work on the mouth of the muscle, from which later comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument arranged, insert the blade first in order to determine how deep the muscle is, so that what enters through the instrument does not go further than it should, and it doesn't hurt the patient; and if the protrusions are larger, cover the depth of the muscle with dressings so that the protrusions do not cause discomfort.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 When abscesses are opened and handled gently with the hands, if necessary cover them with cotton at their heads; and when bowels are emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound softened cloths soaked in rose oil or dry green oil; and put a strong bandage on the wound up to the edge of the muscles, and above the muscles and over the forearm clean cloths moistened with water or other substances properly cooked; then treat after two days of ointment application as needed until it is healed; and never lift the muscles and the wound by using an enema of water and honey, then herbal infusions or long-lasting aromatics are cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 If the wound is set back into the bone, it is necessary to avoid using iron, but treat it as we have said in the earlier section.
de l’enfantement	by:d: ; (O.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 First, know the natural figure of childbirth and signs when you see a woman straining to pass water and desiring to urinate: then quickly expect the baby to be born; thus if this occurs with its sibling, it is following the natural pattern, with the first one being ahead and the second behind; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the baby comes out soon because as they pass their heads, the second one follows too, and the bone marrow clears excess fluid naturally; but those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At times it comes upon his feet, and reaches the body or head, and the hands, appearing under his belly or navel, and sometimes turned about his neck, and in other unnatural positions; so skilled healing is required that they are knowledgeable and subtle in these matters, free from error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how to help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes down from its head naturally and the woman gives birth vigorously, and her strength is weak, then she should sit on a stool or be held by women; and let nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and afterwards place the balm between her thighs where it forms the small suppository as follows.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Cut the secondina and bandage his thumb until the moisture that runs out passes; and press the woman's abdomen as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, one must enema her with muscatel wine mixed with fenugreek oil; then hold it pressed for a conditioning hour and let her cough and sneeze: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands are forcibly pulled apart, you should gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot be inserted, place a stool underneath her, and lift her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground, support the woman so she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot be reinserted and the child is dead, cut the hands at the ligature previously placed there, and extract the child, resetting it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From the egress of the child with its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child is above its feet, you must push it upwards; then gently and gradually turn it until it's levelled; then grasp its legs and extend them slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it reaches up to the hips, if you are commanded to press, and it expels in its condition; if it jumps again, so be it as God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not rise as we have said, if you turn it a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	let them they ne f so that de.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk oil of a high grade, olive oil for rubbing, and melted resin; put this mixture on the nature of the woman's body inside and out, then make her sit in warm water up to under the ribs; when she is softened below, apply collyrium with myrrh there, leave it for an hour, then have her sit on a chair, next make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nostrils, gently rubbing her belly as the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the exit of the child through his thighs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this condition, the midwife places her hands gently and gently; then lies supine with his neck down, and hangs his feet towards him; and lies on the bed, bending his hands gently, and then presses her hands over his belly, removing the cushions from underneys, until they are aligned correctly; and if the child does not kick, she pulls his legs and moves them properly, then moves his belly forward, then pushes with her hands; and rocks the child gently; and commands the woman to squeeebrood as long as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	* s forme: that th revirable:
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It's necessary to engineer returning the hand: if it cannot be returned, raise the woman and move; if she cannot stand, lay her on a bed with legs straightened as I have described; and if she does not give birth, seat her on a chair, then examine how to return the hand; and rock the child naturally, and make her sneeze, and command that she squeesheer until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	And at its of its endes and then heal de the sante quittez ce que les enfants soie li it makes his est desoient.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the barber washes his hand, then turns it little by little and wipes it lightly; and when it becomes even, place on it of musk oil and ointment as we have said, then command that it moves a little at a time; and once you have done this, make it sit on the chair, and command that he blinks; and cause him to sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	they do:  t (e lesse JJosa recorce que he may not d ; b'i; the same in the last.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes in this manner to the second finger, clip the fingernail so that all moisture is removed; and if the child falls on his face and neck, trim the beard as well, ensuring it is not held back, allowing the child's hair to move freely; then place the child inside, positioning him properly until done correctly, and command the woman to blink at no time: thus gently straighten.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the release of the sinews
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	One sees that many times sinews are born; and never in one birth are three or four. And this is not a strange thing, it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that do not live if they have no name: I know how they multiply and become exposed through the flea who steals them, which is linked to the boil; and sometimes they emerge naturally as a tumor does beneath the skin, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they emerge suddenly, as we have described the treatment, and it is done by subtle healers, and quickly makes what needs to be made; thus creating cures that are beneficial.
de plusors enfans	by far ne la C's cermma bon; sigh the n'est ovaut:
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are never formed in groups of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or any more up to XV, and they take the form of children by the measure with glorious wisdom, and it is suitable that the healer understands all this because occasionally things happen; thus creating accordingly what needs to be done.
de l’enfant mort	From a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman with a dead or pregnant belly as I have mentioned in the division, and there is no labor, and you are forced to work by hand; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fears death; it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back with her head turned downwards, and legs raised; then moisten the stitches with oils mixed with musk resin and fenugreek seeds, and apply these oils and substances to the wounds of both sides if she lies on a bed so as not to be disturbed by childbirth. Then rub the mouths of the thighs with moistened oils containing musk resin and fenugreek and flaxseed; then grease her hands with these oils and substances, then place them gently into the thighs so that they are suitable for this purpose, and be careful if the child is positioned to descend over its head. Insert the probes into either her fingers or neck, mouth, palate under the upper lip, chin, armpit, or near the ribcage, and if the labor is happening at the feet, insert a probe between her thumbs or in the middle of her arms; it should be done with her right hand holding the syringe, placing the tube between the fingers of her left hand, gently inserting the probe into any suitable place until emptying occurs; this is the form of the probe.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then place against the other occiput as needed for your extraction; and then extend equally by moving from one side to the other so that the muscles can move out, and have the occipital bones properly aligned for movement as shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains attached, apply oil to its edges and insert it into that area, while pulling the other side; and if none remain, place this occipital bone or higher, as needed until they are fully separated.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand lies in front of the other and cannot be brought together due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap above the shoulder blade until they separate completely; then cut at the joint line or near the ribcage and do likewise on the other arm and legs.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to extract, or there is a swolcued skull, you must place the spatulous spear between your fingers and elevate the head and remove the pus; then use the instrument called "almidach," which will shape it with expansions or scrapers as mentioned here. In this way, make the child's forehead naturally prominent; then treat the bones with tongs, and if the head breaks free forcefully, continue to split until the pus that has emerged is gone; and if it cannot come out, break it apart into pieces where you can move them; and if it is swollen in the abdomen or below the ribs, make an incision as far as the pus flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, there is a slight pull, and the direction to the mouth of the anus is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is troublesome in the abdomen or udder, one should extract it with a draped bandage around the hand; and massage the abdomen or udder until the moisture within disappears; and if other limbs are numb, and the head remains dislocated, then push your hand firmly into the marrow cavity, and pull up to the mouth of the marrow cavity; then insert a pincers or tweezers and twist it firmly; and if the opening of the marrow cavity is closed due to an abscess that has formed inside, do not exert yourself but provide moist and fatty substances; and apply those treatments frequently, and compress with warm and soft water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 If the child is on his back, and you can put him upright, arrange as we have said in a live child; if there's no power, pull gently piece by piece, leaving nothing of the sacrum.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, if it is arranged as we have said in abscesses that come to the bone; and if bleeding occurs, apply an ice compress, and give other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child in her womb had died; then another was conceived above it, and the other one that had died came out again.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	d; 9 as much is then:tin the context by the said.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I pondered for long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster, and after some days another bone protruded.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very puzzled because it had no bones inside.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	by a.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I will treat the wound and injure hands, until the woman is much better; she remained like this for long times, then it stayed slightly bent backward; and I don't remember this chapter being used because when masters encounter strange things, they know how to handle them.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	it; sulée the patient;
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of pressure, where one inserts books; and with two turns at two heads of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 Indeed, the horn should be more subtle in restriction, and made of ivory or boxwood; and the mouth's back is to be as wide as a foot, with margins along the trees half a palm long, and between them two spacings from this same piece, firmly joined on both sides, about half a palm long or slightly more; these two spacing are fitted into the margin of the marrow for opening when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lightweight, is made of ebony or boxwood wood according to the resemblance of pliers; with two spans having at its span widths, an inch wide on both sides; and when you see opening the marrow completely with all instruments, have the woman sit on a bed, her arms extended and legs apart, then insert the two spacings closely together into the margin, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with pliers equally, according to the quantity that opens the mouth of marrow, until the bale does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all made of iron and have various appearances; and when the master has prepared them, their work is much faster, and higher in value for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not neglect an instrument that you have not prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the second toe is caught during childbirth, it must be instructed to the patient that she retract her toe, and then tie its ends with cloth, and strain her hands at the mouth and nose; if they escape through this, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take a jar and make it have a lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare (the womb), such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, marigold, and centaury; all these herbs or any of them should be boiled in water on fire; then place a cloth or lid with its edge over the jar, and the other end inside the mouth of the mare (womb); let it stand until vapors come into the womb; then make it sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he suffers from a relapse of the swelling promptly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it remains after this treatment and is not improved, command the patient to moisten his left hand in oil of essence or musk water, then push it into its place, and apply bandaging; when she has found it, grip it firmly and stretch it slightly straight so that the bone does not protrude during extraction. However, it must be moved gently to the right and left, then tugged; it will come loose and disengage.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the bone is too long, we have advised the treatment of inducing sneezing and fumigation with herbs; if it does not improve from all that we have said, be careful to avoid pulling on it. However, it must be tied at the edge of the bone near the mouth and then cleansed inside with anointed enema by tetrapharmacist medicine; this will help it return and become firm. But still, if a foul odor comes from it to the stomach and head, causing nausea in the patient, then many are weakened.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore one should use incense for this: none of the old have tried the smoke incense of dried sorrel and figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used for smoking the woman to retain bloom and vitality is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It appears similar to a sack, and places the subtle head in its natural state, with wide shoulders over fire; and there are fumigations upon the coals, and the lichen until it is consumed, then begins anew another.
de percier lou fondement	Of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Children are born who do not have the proper foundation but rather a subtly deficient one: therefore it is fitting for the midwife to pierce that subtlety at its due time and not with a spatula or sharp object, and ensuring she does not touch the incision; then place cloth soaked in wine and oil upon it, followed by ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it does not stay in place, then apply a ligature of flax and leave it bound for days, and remove when the child wishes to move freely.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And at no time come these swellings from the healing of a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to treat such swelling: apply as we have said with flax ligature.
de la fistule dou fondement	C.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that arise from the foundation are inflamed and grow near it or between its parts, in areas of II fistules or more; and if this inflammation is ancient, action is required, along with moist bile or subtle bowels, and these fistulas never occur alone; they are known by what comes out or egestion or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes in vomiting a certain kind of substance.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that run down to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; and they reach the hip joint, and to our knees.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus is found the persistent pus at the base [of the wound], and it does not go away: you must push your index finger or thumb to the base, and insert a fine needle of willow bark or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twisting, you must insert a small thin tent or horse hair as long as you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there are no signs of pus drainage or inflammation as we have said: believe that it does not pierce.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	The you done. And the best duce of the doite lese is not fist vous se does to ce que you made it.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it reaches up to the hip joint, then the tent comes near to its place; if there is no twisting and pain relief upon insertion, then you must pull it out completely without medicine or ointment; and in these persistent fistules, there is no effective cure but effort, and deception by those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In those who are neither fearful nor old, with hope of healing by ferment, as I have tested, and let the patient lie between your hands on their back; lift their legs up to their thighs, and incline their thighs towards their belly; then apply a tent of linen or silk if there is any twisting, until you know where the tension occurs.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels pain around their foundation, it is necessary that you insert your index finger there if they feel any tension; and if you sense between your index and middle fingers a sac or abscess, then know they are fearful; do not try to treat it unless it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 Anytime it can be well healed, but this happens rarely; and the patient suffers from what one does to them, which is using a subtle caustic according to the size of the fistula as previously mentioned; and pours all hot into the fistula until it comes near the foundation; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these hardened sores appear like a bird's feather; then treat the swollen tents with butter until they soften, then treat with soothing ointment unifying char and healing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If not otherwise it can be healed; and if the swelling penetrates to within a quarter inch of the foundation, and between your two fingers there is an abundance of char or syphilis, and you see that the fistula comes through where the cover is soaked with pus; start at the beginning of the fistula, pour into it before reaching the swelling, then apply caustic afterward as long as it reaches to the top of the swelling; when healed, remove any sores resembling a bird's feather and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If blood is lost, and it cuts between you and your work, then cauterize with fire or medicinal herbs.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings together two things: that is the healing of dislocated joints and blood coagulation as well as moisture removal; then the treatment of dirty bandages either in fat or in chopped chalk, until the wound is fully dried out, and it becomes possible to extract the charred tissue from the wound; then care for the ointment on sores caused by a hard splinter, and are the remedies dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, then it heals and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near to the very beginning of its root, and is removed from the body, then give it an hour or two before inquiring further.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent and inside there are wounds or splinters that need to be pierced, do not hesitate with confidence and hope through ministering by one of the three ways: either cauterize as we have said, or cut until empty, or if possible use dressings and treat as first; and do not cover too fully, lest you conceal the foundation that excretes spontaneously; then care for it as we have described; perhaps it will heal, or remove that covering and cleanse after being excised near the foundation, or by means of a tool sharpened; then mend the false char which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and maintain the fistula on the part further than the foundation: it would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 At no time are boils formed in this manner: and when you strike the tent at the boil, and it is close to the foundation near the skin above, then take a pierced tent according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	the marole ce est, so that:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pressed against the foundation within, then extract the thread of that pierced tent and strike your thumb or foundation; then twist the head of the thread and bring both heads together, holding them tightly for one or two days, and keep fastening until the threads pull through where they are between the two, and tear apart; then heal the wound until it is firmly closed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, then pierce it in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	que est les t; If he est thems and ce ; by the de bon:t quel m:
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spatulous splinter causing boils is both sharp and blunt; and in another aspect, it does not mean that one cannot tear as you should see here.
des emorroydes	The calluses.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Multitudes are in two ways: they reside within the foundation just like a grain of resin and some are small while others large; inside one may find blood and sometimes multiple sources, causing weakness in both the foundation and atop it. However, those that have escaped contain little moisture and either possess yellowish water or a bit of blood, maintaining their bodily color. The care for these within the foundation involves instructing the patient to squeeze until they are able to go into rooms; as soon as the foundation is firmly set in place, the threads appear. If you hurry, then cut with tweezeboar or hold it by your nail and sever at its roots; if pincers cannot grasp due to moisture, use a piece of cloth or camel hair; extract them between thumb and forefinger, then cut, and dust with hot powders used in cauterization. Or you may cauterize as described in the chapter on cauterization, since it heals various other injuries until they are healthy again; if the foundation cannot emerge, perform astringent clister to cleanse what remains at the base so that it can come out clearly. If patients experience contraction and the threads remain firmly placed within the foundation, treatment is easy; grasp them with your nail or tweezeboar, cut, then treat as we have described until they are healthy again, preventing incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to prepare the wound as follows: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, turning both ends of the thread over the needle so that they are thick; tighten the thread firmly, then untie the thread, remove the needebore, and do likewise with all others, leaving one to allow for excess blood flow; then put a linen cloth moistened with rose oil or cerot on the base, place it there, and command the patient to rest; then leave them until they bleed out, and once they have clotted, treat with ointment and other remedies until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	In the firmness of bones or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	; c and la ane tous;ll:le t; O; Marlette line le phlique.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape the skin over a spatulum or toenail, ensuring it remains dry; then treat until it hardens as required; and if it cannot harden, resume scraping more vigorously than before, until thoroughly cleaned, and be scorched; then treat until it is healed.
dou fremit	By a sudden movement
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A small swelling appears near the chest, and spreads widely; it never feels coldness, but is felt like deathly shivering, affecting the whole body more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 The treatment is to take an inkling of goose feather or strong chicken quill and place that at the shivering spot until a purple circle completely surrounds it; then turn your hand over the inkling, covering entirely around the shivering area, spreading it widely, and extract the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a chain of iron or steel in this form, and let it be subtle from below and traverse above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not feel it piercing or pressing on both sides, and if you see, cauterize the trembling as it is before or with a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	s
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At no time is an enema made of silver or lead, or molten wax or soft clay; and at no time are small and large suppositories prepared according to the substances they are imbued with.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those which in the treatment of children and who are weak and sorrowful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether small or large, is above wide, or the abdomen tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 Et il y a un écart ou les intestins soient liés, comme tu vois, et le chêne soit divisé par piqûres ; et à l'un des côtés II ptérions, et sur l'autre I; et soient les intestins ou om mettent les médicaments d'une vessie de bête ou de parchemin, et soient percés tout entor de menus ptérions, et à chaque ptérion il faut un espace, puis fourrez avec ce fil fort d'un fil crû au travers X ou plus, et assembler l’intestin comme une chèvre ; et quand les médicaments sont dans l', fixez-les devant d'un fil fort, puis clisterisez; et c'est la forme du cercle :
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 Let the medication be neither too hot nor too cold, and apply oil or tallow butter on the rectum, or similar substance, then pour it in gently; then let the minister massage with both hands together until well-absorbed, after which remove the enema, and elevate the patient's legs, and if the medication comes out, do so as much as possible; and if he sleeps through the night entirely, more recovery aid is provided.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema in illness of bowel discharge, and the medicines hasten to leave, so that it recurrences until they are healthy again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are swoln or an abscess, make a subtle enema as for an infant; and this is the form of the subtle enema to which the buttocks are strained.
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In the section on wound treatment that we have already discussed, now we shall speak of hand and foot care, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of and from which parts or how they are made, and for what reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 Of things by which wounds are made there is striking with stones, sharpening of swords and knives or lances or cudgels or similar items; or those done according to the natural openings of the body, such as a bleeding vein on the neck, or head, or thighs, or abdomen, or liver, and similar limbs. And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple skull wounds, because memory shall come to its place in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound to the head occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it was caused by striking with stones or similar things, and the skin is wholly torn and the wound large, and you slightly doubt of a hot abscess: immediately elevate the cephalic (head) part if there is little bleeding from the wound, and position the patient opposite to the affected side. Prevent repletion in the sick person by wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If he does not wish to fast, then beef should be reduced and he should abstain from wine or meat dishes; apply it to the wound where an abscess may form, using soft cotton cloth soaked in oil only or with stiffened wine; if there is no abscess, place it on a fresh wound that does not move due to air or dust, of which I will say more shortly; and if it has moved, apply ointments until healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and appears so that the lips cannot come together by themselves, then join them with stitches, just as I will say for abdominal wounds, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to bone and partially closed, only held by a little bandage; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore durable leather for skin replacement, and instruct the patient to eat fatty meats as you have tested and cooked wheat, also similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 If you find the flesh putrid and it does not affect the bone, remove all the rot completely, then wash thoroughly, and then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without a suture will not heal by medicines alone, so tie off the artery; and if this does not help, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: you must put on this powder which has salt, so that it may move (the artery) with heat.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The manner of the powder is as follows: take one part incense; blood from a dragon two parts; live coal three parts, and make the powder finely, apply it to the wound, and compress firmly until it becomes well-aired and joins with all its blood; then bandage it securely, leaving no loose ends unless there is swelling; for you do not remove the medication until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	;t and her.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the wound has moved out of place, especially in this case, do not use this powder; but apply certain digested ointments, or wheat flour mixed with water and honey until it spreads widely; then treat with other remedeby until healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 If the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, use subtlely extracted pinches; and I will tell you later about the breaks at the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound on the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The sores are similar to this one of these cuts thereupon the neck; but it is not have any difference between them wound and also la coups d’est heal up with fire.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, there's no other remedy than to leave the wound; do not apply anything restricting, as it harms and draws back the nerves; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; but let it be medicated as usual, like chalk washed in soft water and mixed with oil roseate, and boiled in soft water similarly, and other remedies according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The wound is large, you must stitch it up then bandage and care for it until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wounds are deep and swollen with blood, puncture them or cut lower; and if the artery is exposed, when bleeding occurs, stop it, tie off, and cauterize as necessary; and if a thorn in the throat is removed, or the heart, and the vein is guarded by how it runs, then pull the flesh over the lump of the throat, without touching the throat but placing it according to its natural shape; then apply a tight bandage, leave it for several days, then treat with ointments until healed; and if the wound has pressed on the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone left, grind them all away, leaving those that cannot be removed until the swelling subsides, and make a drainage hole and elevate the end; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	When there is bone in the wound with an accompanying fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound caused by a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the injury is deep, then look to see if the patient exhibits swelling and pallor: thus recognize that the wound may be fatal; but if not deep and all its blood supply fresh, do not apply powder at once, nor bind with bandages for preventing blood flow outward, which would return to the body and poison the patient; instead, use attractive ointment and apply it twice a day; and if no ointune is available, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture and make the patient sleep on the injury for three or four days, or more; spasms or body tremors will not occur. And when you see signs of improvement, recognize that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat with bandages and other remedies until healed; and if it cannot be healed or worked on, as soon as you find there is an abscess, then treat accordingly as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is a simple incision from a sword or knife, whether on the front or back, treat the part that is before it; if large, with bandages; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in bone with pieces of iron, treat the wound itself, and remove any foreign objects if they are protruding; and if not, allow the wound to scab over to ease extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is made as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Disruption of the stomach opening
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The falls of the belly are great and small and minute; from a large wound never does any intestine fall out or its nerves, due to which there is an invasion inside; and suturing is more difficult, and it's worse than the small wound rather than the large one because when resetting the intestines, they are pushed back in with greater force if not placed warm immediately; as the intestine swells almost instantly upon feeling cold, they are pushed back harder, thus a smaller wound moves more easily, and hence suturing the intestines to their place is done before all others. And know that treatment of the belly falls into four manners: common incisions occur in the abdominal incision, and other incisions from other bodily injuries are also common with these; nevertheless, they are more appropriate with the abdominal incision, and I shall describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and no part of the intestines is pierced, there are various ways to address it, as we have said before: either due to the minor nature of the wound or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in one of the following ways: moisten an esponge or a cloth with warm water only, or boil vinegar and salt and spices, and soak the intestine until inflammation has subsided; do not repeat this action excessively, as to avoid further swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the inflammprise subside, moisten the intestine with warm or boiled water as it is necessary to facilitate entry; and if there is difficulty in entering, make a small incision at the instrument used for removing varicose veins; the first treatment is to reduce its size, which should not be done without great need nor have it expanded: this is the method of cutting into the cavity, reaching inside without exiting or bulging.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is expanded, and the internal tissues tear away, if you can reset them according to their natural shape in its proper place, if possible, because this allows movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is large and located below the belly, it is appropriate to lay the patient on their back with their legs higher than their head; if it's located below the belly, raise the head and hips above the lower parts; similarly, when the injured area of the abdomen is in one side, align so that the affected part is raised higher than the other; thus, I instruct you as follows for treating large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, use the following method: cleanse and prepare the area with mineral powder; then take a needle or several according to the size of the wound, leaving an inch from the top edge of the wound for each stitch you make using a strong thread through two holes made by puncturing the skin just beneath. Join both ends together and double the thread around the needle; then assemble the wound edges tightly as you go along, leave another inch, and insert an additional needle; tie off the thread similarly to how you did with the first stitch, continuing this process until the entire wound is closed. Use medium-sized needles, not too fine or too thick: they must be of medium gauge because very fine ones cut through the skin easily, but those that are too thick may not penetrate properly; and do not place the needle holes too far from the actual wound as this will prevent proper suturing. Afterward, tie off the needles' ends to keep them from moving when the patient lies down, cover with bandages or gauze where the needles are placed until the wound is sewn shut; and this stitching method with needles is more effective for small wounds, as in one case I sutured a man whose abd <continue>
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned his intestines after it had been for 24 hours since he was injured, and the wound was stitched up until the 15th day, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the master thought he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; I placed cotton twice daily on the wound and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Or I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch: take the needle and push it through from the back until reaching inside; when it has pierced the skin straight in line with where you inserted the neednily or threaded, then cut it out from another side into the area inside; and the principle of this stitching is that you sew as a furrier would make pelts, allowing one part to protrude once, and take it back again until the entire stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of suturing, which Galien describes properly, is as follows: uniting two parts together naturally by placing one end of the skin flap onto the other and using a needle in this manner: insert a needle or thread into it just enough to pierce through; leave both sides of the skin flap. Then turn the needle and pierce through until reaching that far onward to within, between two skin flaps that are opposite each other; then pierce one end and the other further inward to where another pair of skin flaps exist on the opposite side; this is the manner of suturing most commonly used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galien states this as follows: one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and it should be done by placing one needle on one side and the other on the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps; thus, when the grain is within the belly, suturing there becomes more challenging than in any other part of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgements of the wound are such as with other wounds: when you find the fresh wound still bleeding and it has been moved by arrows, then reset the intestines and the bowels; then apply powdered charcoal paste on it, if the arrow's movement is noticed, then put any present ointment on it until the wound heals; trim the thread, tie up the sinew, and mix the myrrh; then treat the wound as with others until they are healthy again; if no medicines are available, apply cotton cloth moved twice a day until recovery.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not need any other medicine for various wound conditions; and if you suspect the wound is causing unity in the main body parts, it's necessary to grind linen lightly in oil of warm salt water or rose oil, and place it around the affected area and below the elbangs; and if there is pain or swelling spreading upward, and this often happens, then administer black wine enemas frequently, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines; pierce inside them and cleanse that when it's the large intestines, they are easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are inflamed, and this is due to the swelling of veins, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity to their nature's nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 If the spleen falls from the wound, and it is reset similarly to the intestines while still fresh; and if it becomes old or blackened, then one must remove the black portion so that blood does not accumulate, for veins and arteries are there; then cut out what lies between the ligaments, and place the two eyes hanging from above the wound to ease its extraction as the spleen moves, and the wound contracts.
de la routure dou boueil	From the direction of the boil.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestines are inflamed and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men because I have seen a man was wounded by a lance; and the injury was on the right side of the stomach, which became infected and turned into a fistula causing evisceration and winds, so I applied treatment as best as I could, without ceasing to delicately treat it until healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient still had pain in his stomach; but there was no harm and he improved overall, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that for small intestinal wounds, they must be tied off partially: take large swellings, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the swelling opens its mouth, place it over both edges so it stretches across; and then seal the head, which stays as such until it cannot separate further, and then apply another swelling in that manner repeatedly until the wound is completely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 Those who head is lodged in the intestine causes no harm to the patient, and it can be attached by tying the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine; proceed as follows: take the end of this thread that has been properly cleaned, then tie it with a fine linen thread twisted into strands, place the thread on a needle and sew through the intestine, and stitch up in layers. This method of stitching from within is no different than according to trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it occurs in one of the groin intestines, there is no remedy or healing other than subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, or if it has one
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula," especially if it swells and protrudes outward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is the result of improper blood circulation being hard and bloody, with no pain felt, swelling as if it were a bird's feather; at times clear protrusion, at other times thickened; sometimes dry, at other times moist enough; I have discussed in the division of wounds that any unhealed wound does not heal unless by one of nine causes: namely, due to insufficient blood or body strength; or its malignancy; or because there is a hardness internally and on the lips which prevents bleeding; or too much swelling; or the flesh is infected with poor quality matter; or the medicine is not good for treatment; or because of pestilence-like corruption; or due to delayed digestion in that region, slow health recovery, and natural fading; or there are veins or bones: I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula, which is done through manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Le fistule se fait dans tous les membres du corps; car il y a fistules qui proviennent des grandes veines, et des artères, et des nerfs, ou à la rate, ou à l’intestin, ou à la vessie, ou aux côtes, ou à la colonne vertébrale, ou à toute articulation des mains ou des pieds; et s'il se produit dans les propriétés principales du membre.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All types of fistulas affect all parts of the. They are serious to heal; there is only labor and ignorance in them; if any type does not reach where I have mentioned but you trust its cure and see it healing, then take a tent made of wax or iron - if the fistula is straight use the wax tent; if the faster is curved, select a finer tent from plastic because the plastics bend around the curve. If the fistula has many openings and you cannot adequately cover them with tents, perform a enema through one of the openings as it will flush out any moisture; then apply salve firmly at your discretion to check for presence of bone or nerve, if swollen from inside. Ask the patient about pain felt when pressing with your hand and locate where it is felt. When you have determined its exact location, whether away from joints, arteries, veins, or any of the areas I mentioned earlier, follow my instructions precisely; excise the tumor as well as corrupt tissue within. Treat until healed, and if fistula penetrates deeply to the right spot (not near bone/nerve/artery), it may require an incision straight through, cutting away all infected material. Then apply wet bandages with medicinal ague solution up to the top of the fistula until the medicine dissolves excess tissue; and then apply ointments with healing herbs until healed completely. If not yet healed, perform cauterization as I have described, and if bone is affected by the fistula, excise it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If veins or nerves bother the main limbs as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackening, then the king must treat such incurable cases until all the decay has been removed from the bone; and if it is not restored to health, reset it as before, ensuring you do not go beyond what can be achieved: expose and cure until reaching the bottom of the issue, remove all decay, then restore its place; and if it becomes healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, understand that the decay is too extensive to deal with; if there are only small pieces of corrupted bone and they can be pulled out using forceps, extract them with an appropriate instrument for this purpose; and if there are many bones, extract all of them without leaving any behind; and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or doubt, use a drain and remove the moisture and tissue, then free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 If you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something offensive to the wound that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until pus surrounds the bones; then they will more easily have the bones' leverage; and if it is a large bone, like of leg or thigh, treat corruption thoroughly until all bone turns black, then close the wound; and if there is significant part with rotting flesh to the point of reaching the bone; you must cover and protect everything up to the corruption, and then heal it as much as possible. And I will tell you about a case of fistula that occurred in one man's leg, so you may use this example and aid in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Long ago there were young people whose age was around thirty years who had pain in their leg from an internal cause that came into the body until the materials reached the leg, and it fled from a large abscess, with no need to open; but the doctors worked so much upon it that they opened the abscesses, consuming many substances, becoming fistulous, and there was great discharge of pus that all avoided touching its wetness and odor in the body; and many doctors applied treatment for two years without any success, as I found when called, observing their leg and the medicines used to treat them, which flowed through the channels into a large part of the body; and it became red on the young person's body, having an amber color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I constructed a tent on one of these points and then searched all the points, finding that each approached every other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Therefore I did this and cut into one of the points as long as I discovered a part of the bone, finding it rotten and pierced, and the corruption reached to the inner bone; it appeared from the rotting bone that there was no other corruption except for what I had shown. So I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines over a long time but could not sew it closed; then I resumed, discovered the same state of the bastoin as before, found continued corruption in the bone and treated it likewise, and then removed it, attempting to suture at that spot; however, when trying around an inch of the bone, the entire piece betrayed me completely. It was returned with medicines again and healed and sewn quickly thereafter without further complications than those caused by the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure it or from fear of his death which I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood is often bloody, but it was completely healed, and in place of the bone arose a hard bed, and it had good disposition and no harm or hindrance at all throughout, neither on approach nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated as follows: take a ligature and stretch the chief of the bone that appears, and command no one to extend it upward; then place another bandage from a thicker linen than the first bandage, tying it above the hard bed over the bone, extending the head so you can pull out the corrupted graft at its base, ensuring the growth is not disturbed; and place a hot iron or a wooden plank underne. It should be treated until one can see and feel the decay, and then treat it again later on.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part, reveal the whole wound; then place tinder underneath it, and then transfer from one part to another of the corruption as much as possible, just as we have said. And if the corruption is in the joint, separate the affected joint, and remove the bone that contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there's no better remedy than wax. And if the corruption is at the tip of a finger or toe, then it is a very difficult thing but nevertheless you must seek out how the corrosion opens; cleanse it in all ways that are possible without being hindered by veins or nerves; and know there are many instruments for cutting these bones, depending on their placement, appearance, size, fineness, largeness, hardness. Therefore, it is necessary to equip each type of operation with its instrument; know which instrument the work will show you that you need according to the knowledge of this art, and by the signs provided by the illnesses' behaviors; thus consider what instrument you need according to what it should be done.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may rot or decay due to heat, or from excessive use; and when you have applied the appropriate medicines for treating such corrosion, and they prove ineffective, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the corrosion originates, so that the patient can be freed by means of death or by evil, which is greater due to the deficiency of the limb; and the signs are such that the limb turns black as if scorched by fire, and afterward becomes affected throughout its entirety; thus act quickly in covering it up, and if this is caused by the sting of venomous creatures like sea scorpions, snakes, and others, then when the corrosion reaches to the head of the arm, protect it without delay.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it comes to the hand, then cover the joint without reaching the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover the elbow; and if it passes the eltso, that is death, with no remedies but depending on the quantity of its virtue; thus treat whenever corruption occurs or affects a limb: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it reaches the arm, then cover all the arm; and if it goes up the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other strategy than for the patient to die; and the manner of wrapping or bandaging the limb should be such that you wrap it above and below, extend one finger on each side by a span in width, loosening the cloth between the two ties.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if blood flow occurs while you work, promptly cauterize the site using caustic powders or hold pressure until the treatment is complete; then bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage and care for it until healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man who was gravely ill: He had a dark spot that appeared like fire burns, which first affected his right foot, spreading throughout the entire area; when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the foot with leather, and it healed; after some time, the corrosion returned on his hand, and I treated him; applying remedies that reactivated the body's core did not stop the corrosions. And if I wrapped his hand in a bandage, or suspected that by cutting the hand, he would die, because the man's vitality was weak; so he lost all hope and returned to his homeland, covering his hand with leather, and it healed; and I have not told you of any other treatments unless necessary for this procedure.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 At no time does an abscess form in its natural place, and it remains so long that a large collection of pus forms; and then it breaks and drains, and the wound oozes, and the eyes stay shut like eyelids; and the skin above is as subtle as cut silks, and does not perforate all the way to the bone or nerve, so these illnesses are called 'healed', but not 'fistula'; but if it becomes so extended that it reaches the bone completely, then it's a 'faster'; and the skin is such that you should excise that entire layer of skin; particularly when it is subtle like cut silks, and does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If you believe the skin is hardened and not completely corrupted, and the skin is dry like wax, then cure with an enema as follows: check if the buttocks are large, and the bowel that lies there has a foul odor; then use an Egyptian medicine prepared in this way: take ease, oil, and litargyrion, in equal amounts, and cook them in one vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then add according to your need, mixing with water and hurtle, leave it for two hours, and then squeeze out. Do this many times until the buttocks are formed and have no pus; do not use an enema of just water or ashes unless this Egyptian medicine is present, and instead gather grape vine ash, pour water over it, strain, and use for an enema until you know that the buttocks are well-formed. If the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the water with ashes in enemas, then use just honey and wine; add a bit of litargyrion if needed. Use honey and sweet wine enemas where honey has cleansing properties and wine draws out impurities; after doing this, when you have confidence that the buttocks are well-formed, use an enema containing substances that produce pus in them, or with ointment using a reed, and add sweet wine. Alternatively, use other medicines and unguents as described earlier regarding their properties and treatments; if the rectal opening is small and cannot receive the enema, slightly expand it with iron, then apply an Egyptian or basiliskum ointment until sufficiently expanded. If the wound is too wide, leave enough space for the enema to enter, and if there are feces on top of the clot, use a spoon or more distant location where the clot can be reached.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is fully bent, do not let it spring back with force; and if you cannot cover the wound from above as you see fit, adjust so that the bow moves towards the lowest point possible, for when the bow is fully bent, it must not spring back with force, and if you cannot cover the wound from above as you see fit, arrange in such a way: let the bow move lightly downwards without leaving anything of the bow; and take consolidating medicines to place on the wound, and stretch over linen covering all the area; then apply healing forces to the slightly wider part near the breastbone, using a suitable amount of ointment according to the size of the opening, placing it on the other cloth over the opening for bow support, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once; and those who are under the opening near the sternum often need to be reminded to hold back the bow when they feel it pulling, and understand what will follow from the bow's tension, whether it is venom or a small amount or too much, digestible or indigestible; and take notice if the patient feels pain or weakness, and if there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has spread in such manner that you see its nature on the opening near the sternum, you know that the breast will rise again, and approach health; then release it in the morning or the next day, and when you uncover the wound, change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become poorly digested after many days, understand that the breasts do not hurt.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if you encounter subtle symptoms after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for healing is nearing.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are individuals whose wounds heal slowly and those who do the opposite; if bile remains in the chest for many days without passing, remember that the breast does not become hard; and if it is delayed from defecating, then becomes bloated, and so you should apply dried medicines with moist substance but dry essence, as an ointment ends, because there is a great part of vitriol, which is the final medicine; take an ointnent ending in oil rosé, and heat it equally with old wine; then mix and use it. Apply this similarly to honey when no medicinal ointments are present, or you can take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, and powder over honey while on the fire; afterwards, apply it with a linen cloth to the breast without administering any long-term treatment or lily stalks from heavenly lilies that are like bran meal but finer, and use either simple remedebut if no compound medicines are at hand. And if healing is not progressing despite this treatment, then understand that the corruption has reached its peak, causing pressure on bones or hardened members or ligaments; follow the instructions for treating a fistula as we have mentioned earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or sometimes in other joints; and when it matures, and no precautions are taken, so comes a large abscess, which grows and pus flows until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps the entire nail is affected; and there come corrosions up to the bone, causing such pain that the joints become wide, and the color becomes dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to excise all the excess tissue attached to the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caustic is a great aid if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses on the vein, and begins to point and blister, it is necessary that you place the rod underneath the nail so the vein does not puncture, and push upward, carefully removing the subtle blood, and then apply medicines with burning and corrosive properties to remove all; then cure with ointments until healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if corrosion is in the bone, carefully remove it and scrape deeply because as long as the bone corrodes to such extent, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint corroding, do so inwardly as previously mentioned, then cure until healthy; and if it is hardened and bloody, and causes great pain, first alleviate it; then scrape the nail with a sharp tool across from above, and be careful that the scraping does not reach the vein underneeinlfhe nail because the patient would feel too much pain; and if this occurs, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the dislocation of the hand needs to be relieved.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh, and sometimes it has bone, and at times it has a nail, and none of these arise from the root of the joint, or the origin lies in any of them as we believe about dislocations.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one who occurs in any part of the forearm does not move, and the one that occurs at the joint of the forearm may sometimes move; the stature of the one who is fleshy is light, shaped somewhat: form it from its root with a broad bandage.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: then hold them tightly together.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one where the dislocation occurs at the following part, it is necessary to first cut away the roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate thread length, and then heal until it becomes healthy again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come with the joint uniting occur by birth, or from wound healing, or by burning, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to treat that swelling, ensure that the parts are repaired according to their natural shapes; then place between two cloths or oil-soaked fabrics, so they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine ploughshare, until the joint is sewn up as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocations occur in any of its two parts with the palm, cover that swelling as needed.
des vils	 Of evil deeds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large wars swollen with excessive melancholy that come to various body parts; and more commonly occur in the legs of those who walk barefoot and work, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary therefore to provide him with a single cleansing of pus, and then bandage the wound with linen.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment with iron is in two ways: one method is to cut them and drain the black blood; the other way is to open the vein and bleed it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The body is arranged in this manner: raise the first leg with hot water very strong, so that the large without being refined, then strain the leg above the hip down to the part below the knee; then cut the vein at one spot, either in one, two or three wide slices, then extract and drain the black blood into your hand from top to bottom as much as the virtue of the sick person can tolerate; and then tie it off, and command that he bathe with spoiled meat turning it black; and resume evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The procedures for the body are as follows: lift the ill leg if there is a lot of hair, then give it a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins; and if you have no bathwater, heat it on the fire, and then cut along the vein from the top of the knee to the head or in the area below the ankle. Then treat the skin at each point as long as you can feel it; and it appears red and black, and when inserted into a sheath seems like a white cord; then fill it with rags, until full enough for the sheath, and then place it gently on a stretcher, then cut along another location about three fingers above. Then peel off the skin from over the vein as far as you can feel it, then lift up using the thread as before, and place it onto another stretcher just as previously; then make another incision, or more if needed, then lift it out and cut down to the second location; then remove layer by layer until entirely removed, then cut. And if you cannot pull and remove it, put a strong double-threaded needle through I piece of thread, and tie it off, and turn your hand back and forth as long as needed; and be careful that it does not tear, because if it tears, it cannot be pulled or removed, causing harm to the patient. And once you have completely treated it, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 If the vein is twisted and wrapped together and not straight as we have said, then you should cut it crookedly, but do not cover it completely; and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron with which to cut the vein is bent, and does not sever; it covers the vein. And it has a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would crush the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein (referring to a specific type or location
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is embedded in the legs, warm areas where there are no plants or trees, and dry ground without moisture; and occasionally it occurs elsewhere than on the limbs, which happens due to putrefaction coming from under the skin like that of serpents within a corpse, nestled between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning appear, a great inflammation comes into the leg, then the eye changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the eye opens, it must be wrapped around a piece of cloth that measures from 1 to 2 inches until completely covered on the leg, and the knot is left loose on the limb, doing so every time there's no further improvement; if necessary, wrap again around the swelling, and the knot. If it is too long, cut a portion off and continue wrapping the remainder without covering its root entirely until it fully protrudes; because if covered, it may recede into the socket causing an abscess or infection at that location, and other serious illnesses; thus it must be treated gradually and completely until nothing is left except bone; and sometimes there are no veins when they are treated with 5 or 10 hands' widths of cloth.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 At no time does blood flow from this vein freely, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and there is much bleeding; therefore treat as we have previously stated.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 From worms that emerge between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "bovine sickness" in our land because it often occurs in the veins and consists of small worms that emerge between skin and flesh, traveling upward and downward throughout the body, causing discomfort from limb to limeby touching or cutting through the skin; and is accompanied by putrefaction of certain fluids, similar to serpents, earthworms, ascarids, or intestines. The cause of its malice is doubted because when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head, reaches the eye, and sometimes enters and destroys it; this happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it healing and pulling, it cannot be freed until then: therefore, one must support above and below a strong joint tightly bound, dress the wound, and pull out the splint, and if it turns inward in the chariot, cauterize with fire on top until it dies; and the greatest harm it causes is that they run off oil as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye socket, firmly hold below the eyebrow, dress above, and pull out the splint; one must use medicinal body purifications for dispelling evil humors, and avoid putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain arising from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This illness is called "vakkir" in our land, and it causes pain that comes to some limbs, moving from one member to another; and I have seen what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to see an ill woman, and there I found some swelling in the vein of her arm; shortly after that, I saw it move like a worm up to her shoulder, faster than any other thing, as if alive silver were cut from one place to another; the pain left where it was, and settled into her shoulder, then spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm; she told me that it returned around inside her, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	is the way they are yout les he in: so it the the l's; s as if you le t f the I t m not the and li; blese tre (the body.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Nevertheless, I wanted to maintain that moving the pain elsewhere is beneficial, but I did not observe it as such in the woman; and I thought it was because she had dry skin, and her veins exposed, with apparent constrained flatulence; and not appearing according to this reason in those who are pregnant, and have moist skin and re-closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain if it opens as we have said, promptly wash above and below thoroughly, and then cover up until the constrained flatulence remains in place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not observe it with your eyes, treat those who are unable to pass wind, similar to foul-smelling pills, and serpent's milk pills, and other like things.
des saiettes	 of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the places on the body where they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The various types of them are such that some have large points and small ones, barbed or joined; and those with angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that enters any limb does so in two ways: it enters the main body as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it enters any part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you shortly is evident: if it requires extracting this arrowhead, for death comes after in various ways; and if this malicious sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow enters and pierces the bone is that it causes a swoon, loss of sensation, tremors in them all, along with inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile; and perhaps without fever from the nose or ears; and by chance the speech and voice are affected; and falls like a wound moist white resembling hairs, and in healing as if burned with charcoal; and if these signs appear to you, hold off treatment, and extract the arrow unless it is already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it is lodged or impaled near the left nipple feels as if stuck in something hard, not hollow; and possibly the arrow moves like hairs, and its exit appears black, accompanied by cold blood, chills with cold sweat, fainting: then understand that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrowhead that never protrudes is seen as foam bubbling from the wound; the throat swells, and the patient's skin changes color, breathes deeply, and desires cold water.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead pierces near the lower back, it is close to small ribs; then comes great swelling and pain, deep breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	by that he saidd eco; c in which le ne.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	When the arrow falls into the belly and does not come out through the intestines, there is no hope for treatment or in extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder and it causes incontinence with urine flowing out and coming back, causing the patient intense pain; know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and hip and spine and chest and thighs, and any similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to certain men that an arrow struck or lodged in the root of the nose; I tried it, and pulled from one side beneath the ear fat, and was found without any notable harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled an arrow that lodged in the fat of the eye beneath the eyelids, and the arrow was removed, but could only be reached by its tip towards the bone, and it was a large Turkish bow arrow, easily with any tool except ears; the socket was sound, and no mishaps came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabian arrow with ears: I removed the fletchings, and carefully as I extracted it, the Christian was found to be well.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And when an arrow is lodged in the gut, thinking it would be his death; and after passing XXX days, he did not change his condition; I cut near the arrow, manipulated it, removed it forcefully, and there was no adverse event.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if an arrow falls into a man's back with a sore wound; and the arrow remains inside him without changing his natural condition or causing harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And see another man to whom an arrow falls on his face with a sore wound and suffers great pain from it, and many others alike.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And an arrow lodged in the body of a prince, king, located towards his back, slightly inclined to the right side; and after three days it was fully set, then I was called for treatment once it occurred.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And it was hidden under all a subtle bandage, and I did not feel it; but he felt pressure and pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead. I applied a poultice soaked in diuretic for this purpose because his eyes did not swell; and then his eye socket appeared to be from the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I left the poultice on for days, and then cleaned out the wound completely, so that the patient endured much time until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive antiseptic poultice for days until it was ready, and tried to remove the head of the arrow which emerged from the eye socket; then I approached the wound with that same medicine, as long as the arrowhead in the eyeball became visible; after four months had passed, and then healed so well. Then I enlarged the wound using pliers, pulling it apart on both sides, but could not extract it; thus I ceased to slowly work my way through various methods of irrigation until one day the arrow was removed perfectly formed according to what its final form will appear in this chapter, and then I healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will restore it promptly, and the wound was firmly closed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 And I have told you the quality of arrow extraction; put your care on what I haven't mentioned, for the book cannot comprehensively cover everything; but wise masters often make great strides in areas that are present and failing, performing nine works with only nine instruments to address extraordinary matters occurring in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows lodged in limbs are of two manners: if they enter directly or from another part; and the one which is thrust directly where it enters is an arrow penetrating into soft tissues, and never comes out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not fall now, let it lie so that the joint is fully extended around, and be elevated; similarly if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot come out, let it rest for some days, moving slightly each day; then it will fall, and if it still does not fall, carefully puncture all around with a fine needle until the joints are sufficiently extended, and then treat.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is lodged in the skull, reaching almost to one of the brain's ventricles, and any of the incidents I have previously described occur for the patient: do not remove it immediately, but let it remain as long as possible after some days, because if the arrowhead approaches this far, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrow is not stuck in the bone alone and does not reach the sinew, and if the patient remains for some days without any harmful incident occurring, then employ the method of suction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very lodged and cannot be removed forcefully, then apply a poultice around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrow is reinserted into its original position and cannot be seen if you touch all around it; and if you can feel it, use any suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to widening of the wound or deepening of the arrow shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or tendons, fracture until the wound is large enough; then extract the arrow if you can touch it, and if it has ears to which it clings, break off a part that you can reach with your instrument, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as possible. Be careful not to break the arrow while doing so, allowing for easier extraction.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	bye t s they are they should you m the to be in nt iste et so and de laisso par g;
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood becomes contrary, follow as we have described in its chapter; and beware of incision into nerves or veins, and use ingenuity to draw out the arrowhead without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to how they were when the arrow fell upon them, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do so, adjust as signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 If the arrowhead comes from another part and has opened any wound or if the skin is swollen in that area as it can be seen or felt noticeably: then make an incision there, enough so that forceps can grasp, and then extract; if it juts out strongly now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is lodged in the bone, rotate your round hand, until it enters into the bone and widens it, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, let it remain for now and then resume the extraction as long as it is lodged deep; if there was an arrowhead present, replace with the entire shaft; if any part has broken off, administer binding immediately; using a heated instrument, ensure that the tip of the arrowhead enters into the tool's notch; then insert deeply, and if the arrowhead becomes secure, position the instrument so the pointed end enters completely to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is tainted, it must be ensured that you extract all around where the poison has entered; if possible, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead breaks or pierces the abdum or bladder or ribs, and is accessible, remove it if possible; but do not extract into a vein or nerve; then remove it, and treat the wound as needed until healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used for extracting arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is how it looks:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	et he s c; and li King Louis Farah so yout les they are the oum tisla pas;
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's beak, to point at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of pincers for pushing and grasping is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	and so ongis.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 There are XXXI veins of which we know the names, totaling XVI chiefs: namely, two hammer-veins behind the ears called "herbech"; and two arteries visible in each temple; and two veins in both temples' eyebrows known as "aspires"; a vein midway on the forehead; the sinus above the nose; and two jugular veins located at the neck's collarbone area. Also, two vessels are found inside the lips above the mouth, called "augeherich", and two vessels below the tongue: that is all.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly bled in each arm: the one is cephalic, and is on the left side of the collarbone, and they call it among the people "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it among the people "vein of the body"; and the basilic is on the right side of the collarbone, and they call it among the people "vein of the belly," and is under the armpit, and that is the one which is bled openly upon the hollow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the little savior is the vein that lies between the ring finger and the pinky, with two branches; on the leg where the foot is, there are three veins: one is below the collar of the left armpit, and the second femoral which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "naze" that is in the heel of the other side; and on the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The source of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines; and its quality is such as I have told you, and it is to raise up the patient's head, and rub their temples with a rough cloth; then tighten the neck of the patient with a cord, until both veins appear behind the ears in two layers depending on the height of the head: place them at your fingers, and where you feel hair rising from beneath your fingers, mark it; then take the lancet, and guide it underneath the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein, stripping away skin and tissue well on both sides of its course, and allow blood to flow until you see enough; then tighten and bind it, until it is healed; and I have previously mentioned incision and cautery as in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The vein of the two arteries located in both temples, if old and swollen, torn open, accustomed to tears, and causing pain near the eyes; its quality is as I have described: patients will stretch their necks until the veins are clearly visible; they feel pain behind their ears, then become dizzy; then raise their head slightly above eye level with an index finger, and insert a lancet below, then draw out the blood from above the vein as you did in other veins, and bleed according to your judgement of necessity; afterwards release the patient, place their head on the vein for an hour, then cover it with cotton; and finally bind firmly until healed. Here we have discussed and experienced extraction and beginning as described at the start of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The surgery of the vein on the forehead is as valuable in treating the cephalic diseases of ancient faces, and migraines, and redness; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "sawyer," which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And insert the tip into the vein, and hold steadily with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is completely sealed without any spillage from a wide wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	the blefore lasche f crotain.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The surgery of the II veins that are in II armpits helps with swelling, and itching, and redness, and earache, and facial diseases; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck without any ligament as before; then he sighs, and be sure the surgery of the traver, a little length of a slightly wide incision, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are subtle and sometimes burst; then treat thoroughly with bloodletting as needed, and afterwards bind it tightly on a cloth.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the neck due to heat turns red, and swelling, and facial diseases such as migraines and itching that come on in the face, especially when they are longstanding; and its quality is such that the sickly grips his collar, then strains his neck with his left hand, and takes a thin thread lengthwise, and inserts it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily, and the blood begins to flow immediately; do not go too deeply in at first, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie off after some time, as it is quickly restored; this is the manner of the thread.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The strength of the fingers aids in stretching the alaunche, at the beginning of meselage, and for many diseases, acne, corrosion, herpes, and itchiness; and the quality of the strength is such that the ill person removes his collar from both sides as we have said; and be seated with the master over the head of the sick person, and the sick person lies on their side slightly widely spaced, then tap the blood gently, or as much as necessary; then reposition in the other vein, then release the ligaments, and tighten around the veins moderately, so that the ill person does not strain; and leave until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the stones within the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The dryness of vein lips above assists in stitching within the mouth, and gum decay, and splits in the lip, and sores and ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of the stone is to seat the patient before you, and strain their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, recognizing them by being black and having small black veins around them: thus grasp both, and if you do not recognize them, or are in doubt, pluck out the largest from each side, and do the same for the veins above and below, as they are of a similar kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of the stones underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The stone removal from the veins underneath the tongue follows after cranial extraction and it's at the extension of the throat, and for illnesses of the eye, and mouth diseases; the quality of the extractor is that you must hold the patient with their head towards the sun, lift the tongue, and look below on each side a black vein: thus remove both, but do not go too far inward, as they are arteries underneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins of the arm which are commonly bled according to two methods: either by pinching with all fingers wide apart or with an olive-shaped tube, sharp as cutting knives, and called 'anesil'; and they are both wide and narrow depending on the width and lengthening of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the spermatic vein is highly reputed, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open plain-skinned veins containing abundant and turbid blood, and they are in the shape of an olive flail.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	It is more subtle to locate, and used for draining fine veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, neck, groin, and belly; so it must be for the healer to bled well, and to wash from the artery that lies underne.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if you cut the artery, and bleeding of blood comes, then it must be stopped as I have said; and the flame should not be pinched but trimmed like a straw.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilica does not open clearly, it must be extracted and replaced with another; or you desire none of its threads, or you test to see its blood at its location in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you wish to know the location of its threads, it is necessary that you extract the arm and touch the area until you recognize the hairs; then signify the area with a marking, then bind the arm, and cut the flame as we have said; be careful not to hit the artery when you see the area swelling, for it is an artery: so avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it protruding upwards like the urine of a child, and the vein is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger underneath for a long time, then remove your finger once the vein becomes unknot
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and there are no medicines present, tie off the artery if it is open, for the head of the vein retracts; and close the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a piece of flaxish wood and split it, then take one half and tie it until the next day; if the vein unknots, that is good; if not, then cure as we have said with powders that stop bleeding; and unknotting may be due to various factors in the small area of the wound, and for the strength of the limb.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein's edge being milked helps it to draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of both basilar and cephalic parts, as we have said; and it behooves the leech that it cleans its nerve beneath, and if too much pressure is applied, and finds the nerve, causing it to swell and become painful, and perhaps cannot heal; this nerve opens many times, and if not in any men due to subtlety, then you must cleanse it with an instrument called a lancet; avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if possible.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The cephalic vein helps by drawing blood from the head and aids in healing; one should diligently squeezo the orbital or mirtin area, for it is the most beneficial of all veins as there are no nerves or arteries below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Anyway, it is necessary to seek the lighter one first, and do not strain anything if you must try for the first time, then restart; and sometimes this enlarges in some men when they have to try for the first time, but do not strain anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about purging is that purging is only done to maintain health and avoid future diseases; it can be performed in one of the three veins: cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should purge at the beginning of fasting before dawn, and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of repletion appear; and purging should be done on the first day or third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healing that is employed for diseases does not have a fixed time but when needed during the day or night, at all hours and always; and it is not necessary to apply medicine to children up to 14 years old, nor women who are carrying after seven months up to their seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not dare to lift those old men who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When anyone wishes to heal in any way, it is necessary that they enema the intestines with a light clyster if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluities from the intestines which are harmful to vital org groin; and one should not treat those who are excessively weakened by foods, or drunkardy, especially if they have been eating a lot, nor hydropsy; and after healing someone with colic passion, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination in women, traveling, staying up late, mating, and all the virtues, whether by wounds or injuries to the body. Then carefully remove the humors, if they are large due to foods, drinks, and medicines; but if you have permission from them, then enter a bath unless anything prevents it, in order to liquefy the blood, and cleanse the vein at the umbilical region as we have said; and avoid work on that day, exertion, lust, and similar things; be fastened and joyful, use healers higher than those you are treating, rub their arms twice or thrice, then gently remove ligatures halfway, because if they are too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow properly. Then rub the body with a little old oil on hands until the veins swell and feel it; then put your right hand under that vein at the umbilical region where you want to heal, so that the vein is not tucked in and caught by the forceps.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee as quickly as strings in a minstrel's case, and some of these are flat from inflammation; so when placed above the flame, they retract to the flame, unable to open the vein, thus such is their condition; and if it succeeds with the vein, then the wound may be too narrow because of this, hence one must wisely consider these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	the s:  the most and so that they: Howe wui ert: est know de f
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the wound is swollete and the patient grows hopeful, leaving it for one or two days without binding the arm: sometimes abscesses will arise therein; do not take a bath but resume bandaging if desired by him; and if the opening is small, or slenderly imperceptible, suspecting that no more blood may be seen than you have observed, then apply all of the flame directly to the same opening hastily, so often it happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not attempt to move it again, and apply some oil of wax, as it eases the body's painful blood flow, and is absorbed in this place by the wax; thus treat each vein with oil of wax that you find, to stop the course of blood; similarly, use tar and bowstring when applied to the joint; they are subtle but separate easily if too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there are large abscesses that occur frequently, especially when the opening of the vein is small and one hastily applies pressure to the joint with a moist sponge in warm water and salt, continue for an hour; then it is necessary to do as follows after blood has been released from the vein, and if there remains on the body greenish or verdant discoloration after some days, cause no harm; and if you see anything of aloes or myrrh dissolved in calamint juice, monkshood, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance near the temple of the skull; so place your hand on it, and if you find the spot tender to pressure from your hand, then that appearance is harmful.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Refrain from placing anything on it as we have mentioned, for there may be an artery involved in the joint; however, make a dry splint to harden the area and then apply another treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood loss according to its amount and color of blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see swelling, let it go until it subsides; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 It is necessary for those who are plain and outside, and in need of blood extraction, to make a larger wound with wider slits; and for the weak, do the opposite, support them slightly and frequently, and heal by cutting across rather than pricking; this method of care prevents excessive bleeding and nerve compression, and is effective whether the incision is long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For those whose body needs care after the procedure, give them moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if they are exhausted, administer it three or four times as needed. If of a cold constitution, serve it before care with mushy bread in honey syrup, or an aromatic honey syrup mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, making sure the syrup is fragrant.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if it palms the sinew, after much blood is drawn, then it should inhale a mixture of charcoal and fragrant syrup, and use other things as mentioned in the chapter on syncope for draining veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if the patient desires to vent their arms and be bled again, it is necessary when they are greatly infected, for them to bleed slowly and steadily according to the quantity of their potency continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	tt are not; and segues.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if you wish to heal another part, do so on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood inside the body that has been overheated and causes fever; thus one must extract a large quantity and dilate the veins until they flow abundantly; then attend to all conditions of sinew, and place your hand on the hair when it heals, so death does not come in the area of the wound, which happens often if surgeons are negligent; and do not proceed as though you will rejoin the arm, or cause blood to be expelled a second time when the veins are closed, but firmly press above. If it is gnarled, extend the arm hastily, for that would be harmful; however, let it heal the second time until then, and do not point with a hot flame so long as the blood vessel of the vein has been opened and slightly moistened by water, then press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary again to bleed the blood a second time, let it be done in that same place or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is bled at the top of the head because it is composed of such kind. (Note: This sentence seems to be somewhat unclear or possibly contains a transcription error, as "leu" might refer to an incorrect term in this context).
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The method of the suture is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the needle appears red; then it should be tied off neatly so that the vein looks good, and then stitched through across, not too wide or long; and the knots should be large, and well close to the joint of the hand, ensuring nothing escapes out, if necessary dip the hand in hot water again, and allow blood into the needle until you have enough; and if it is full, do not retie the needle with hot water, because it is put back more often in winter than summer; and the suture of this vein is safer from all other veins, as there are no vessels or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The vein of the palm of the right hand is effective for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done: strain the hand, and put in hot water, until the vein has emptied as you see; and if the vein runs across or encircles everything, do not harm anything; and don't go too deep, because nerves are close to all skin surfaces, then put the hand back into hot water, if the veins have frozen in the wound, they cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	When you have treated the wound as needed, apply oil and grease to the vein area for quick healing, doing so with each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bandaging on that in the left hand is for treating mouse disease, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The vein of the armpit is effective for all diseases that are under the body, such as bone marrow diseases, and stagnation of fluids, and kidney disease, and ancient diseases of hips and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient pours hot water on the vein until it softens, and rubs over the joint with it, then binds above the joint by the bone; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there they go through many layers; so wash them either wider than or at the ankle to see if they move.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you shave the area around the foot, beware of nerves that are below it, and cut through as with scissors; let the breezes become equal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if no blood can exit, reset the foot in water, and ensure the vein drains well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the ligaments need to be reset for a second time shortly afterward, because the joint is swollen; do not doubt the nerve as we have said, and thus apply the ice pack equally to the other leg.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The origin of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle and its sensation corresponds to the pain in the thigh when it's blood-heated.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient lies or sits in a bath and extends four fingers above the annkle by twisting; otherwise, it does not open the vein; if it opens, then wash it in all ways you can think of while traversing; and when able to grasp, do so because the joint is loose, and it is greatly replenished.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you cannot find it, wash any wound of his that opens or is split at the back and on the small toe, protect from nerves; and make such care of the blood that you see, and then release the joint, and put cotton over it and bind it tightly; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Of suction dressings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	the sct Far (thought le bente t l's or.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this suction treatment is of two kinds: one that uses heat and the other does not; and suction achieved by bloodletting in fourteen parts of the body, wherein some are all in the head; others at the neck's junction; others on both sides of the neck; under the chin; over the shoulders; above the hips; along both legs; around both ankles. The suction does not draw blood but minor veins scattered throughout the body, so it need not be restricted to anyone as with venous bandages; and it should not be applied too hot or too cold in any illness caused by repletion until all fluids have been removed from the entire body.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if by necessity of diseases it becomes necessary to vomit, or for habits, let us induce each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every day; for there are those who, when they need to vomit, have a heavy headache; and those who find fullness and redness in their face, forehead, and neck, as well as dimness in their eyes; and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, with swollen tongue, bleeding; and there are those who think, and see with bloodshot and weakened and deadly and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is within the month, after three hours past noon, we order to vomit then.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The straining of the brain helps in treating headaches ... which come to them, and it should not be after evacuation from all the body; this vomiting is for the cephalic inflammation, and only those with a cold complexion or who have catarrh should use it, as it causes great harm; thus nightcaps should not be used by those with cold headaches.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	of the t often;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation within the neck is located near the windpipe and base of the skull, and therefore it is useful for stretching the throat, cutting the canal of the jaw, and all other things; however, it must not be pushed too hard, because if held too firmly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and body issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventosation of the two ribs in the neck is effective for headaches, otitis and migraines, strangulation, pain from vertebral roots, and located near the base of the skull; you must instruct the barber to express his hand while applying, so he does not cut the artery nor cause blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings from below the chin indicate a mouth disease, and decay of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the location of the sanitary areas of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders indicate a disease that comes from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The swelling of the forearm is as much as from III veins in the arm because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, since the lump is very hard, and contains glands and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	the vair hirse they are the untoulet
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The blisters of the legs heal openly because they attract blood from all over the body, and are effective against ancient pains of rain, of mares, and of the bladder; and they rejuvenate the two sophene areas, and the two ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, bringing paralysis in various disposed conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the blister is that you first place it on an empty area, and do so promptly, and set it hastily, and move evenly, and continue this action until you see the reddening and swelling of the location, and it appears with a slight flow of blood; then peel off, and reapply the blisters, and take care in observing the condition of the body, for there are those who have thick charred skin, and clear pores: if necessary, you must puncture only once, making wide and somewhat deep cuts, and drain gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, you must puncture twice: the first time to thin out the pathway of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	When the blood is very thick, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, it suffices for us only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want a lot of blood, repeat often; and if the vein is superficial, pierce deeply, so that the core is quickly perforated, and it is suitable for those with thick and hard skin, as well as those who have been stretched out too much: oil the cords of the ventoscope with aperient and dissolving oil; if this is in place, violet or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if not, chervil, lily, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balsam, or aniseed oil, and other similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If to those whom one treats with a tender and wide chafing ointment, it does not require the application of oil but must be washed after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	the li h; ce:
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with significant excesses should arise from old wine or blackthorn berry water, or anise or chamomile decoction, or similar substances; they must not use a vacuum before the bath nor during it, but one hour after the bath two hours later; and they must not sleep after fomentation, as they should bathe when necessary and if they have been bathed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And keep watch over those who are pale and have colic, and whose stomach is too hot and inflamed; it is fitting that they consume cold things such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and similar items; mint puddings, and chestnut charcoal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And those with a cold complexion should consume syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, along with small portions of food; and the day they undertake it, they must drink more than eat; one must give some patients triaicle or musk before ventosation, or afterward, to comfort the main members; but only those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are placed without causing pain are those put on the liver, and joints, and gout, and on the belly and buttocks and thighs and hips, for that limb does not allow to be touched therein, and is done only to draw blood from one member to another as we do with nipples when they are not healed; to remove the viscosity present in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and buttocks to reduce the limb; and it removes pain, when there is swelling or a stone, then sometimes by its attractive power it may relieve the swelling, or displace the stone from its place; thus it acts when placed on the liver and joints when viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are provided empty to be squeezed as needed; and at times they are filled with herbs boiled in hot water.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of applying the bladder by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it has two pieces of half a palm in width, and around the hole a small opening as to thread a needle, also made of ivy or brass, so that it does not slip from the patient's hand when placed on the limb; and have within a rod transverse made of ivy or iron, for holding a vessel tightly, and they are large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them; because children's suction cups are different than old ones, and lighter than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And thus this suction cup is to be placed upon the limb: take a wax candle or grease, and place it in the middle of the rod that lies across within the suction cup, ensuring that it does not burn the patient; then put it on the limb, with the previously mentioned hole positioned such that when desired, steam is produced, and the su cups are removed. Then take the grease as before, and begin anew often if necessary for your use.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the cupping which is used for pleurisy, there is no penis or perineum, and it is shaped only when filled with water, and placed on the limb fully. And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without cupping is used for limbs where one cannot place cups due to their size, such as lips and gums, or similar areas; and in cleaned wounds like donor or recipient sites, and other similar areas. The characteristic of the use is that when you find cups that are filled with clear gentle water, take them; put them on a cup of mild water until they become plump, without anything inside; then draw blood from the vein and cup together, rub the limb until it turns red, place the cups; and once they are full and tighten, if there is a location where one can place a cup, do so because this is of great value afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, raise the limb with ease and then apply water generously, ensuring it is cold, and wrap in a linen cloth, keeping it on until the swelling subsides; if there are multiple swellings, place vitriol powder or ointments similar to these until they subside; now you may use half of peeled beans, leaving them until they become dry at the limb, which will now seal properly; and if more is needed, obtain additional poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the swellings do not decrease, rub the limb with fresh blood or insert a needle until it pierces the swelling, then apply and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry; when you see that they discharge, sprinkle some aloe powder and crushed sea salt, or ash, so they will harden now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These treatments are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for repairing and replenishing.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn, O wise physician, that the madman seeks knowledge from this treatise, which has never been seen in any ancient books or read; and for this reason, its science is strange on our land, as I have found no good copies; though through the wisdom of ancient texts, to which I devoted myself so much that I acquired their knowledge, and by experimentation, and from the habits of my life, I have described herein what is contained in this chapter, and abbreviated at the end, showing clearly the forms of strangulations they performed, as done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that the purpose of this book is to speak of words and chapters in which the wise man applies his understanding, staying true, so those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fractures or dislocaturations or twists or distortions occur in any part of the body, you must treat the patient with warmth on both sides if nothing is very weak such as infants or elderly; or if the heat is not too strong or excessively cold; and avoid fatty frosty foods like cold soups, poultry broth, do not drink wine, nor eat any greasy dishes, and do not overfill with meats that fill blood vessels until there are doubts of hot abscesses or discharge of matter in the limbs; then illness will return to its former state.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that produce a healthy appetite and are like cooked wheat in fluidity, such as veal, lamb, beef, chicken broth, eggs, fresh fish, red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because proper nutrition represents the muscles' quickness and soon after, the fracture is set right.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken bones of old and decrepit cannot be well repaired or joined according to their nature for limb support, nor those as tender as the bones of young children; but do not fret, reset using large strong pins which are sturdy and join the limb together, until it strengthens as if unbroken; and leave none of your work undone, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	The feroit li cheint qui tu all the la manier: les ceste fait: le mone riguez de tesme ce. Et l'a estropidemane loron les pois congne et en telle, car il li prise est l’en tout li onques:
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	When there is a break with a wound, and a crack as a tiny split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 Each way has its own device and instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind in that place; and it is known there is bone fracture when the eye is twisted and opened widely due to pressure from gripping, and near squeezing of the hand; but if there is no twisting or feeling upon touch, and the patient does not feel much pain unless there is a breakage; however, it can well have twists, splits, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	However, do not just move the hand, but apply with medicine that comes here afterward and then gently stretch it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which is in flight, and are the two parts disconnected, they must now be put back equally; as for abscesses if it comes to them; and if abscesses clear come, let him leave none until the abscess is soothed; then set it evenly with moves that you can do lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of it is easier than in those where pieces are involved; then strain, as it should be hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if the bone is broken into pieces, if divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it'amoebas', or small limbs, or at the cords, or a cord and your hand; put back the member according to its natural shape so that when the separated pieces of the broken limb are devoid, align them with all means in their places as moves you can do, and ensure by your craft there is no injury nor pain to the patient; and well-join the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not moving well: dress him neatly and do not restrain or press as those who cause abscesses to come out quickly and contractions of the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is fixed in place, properly instruct the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, or otherwise; and ensure that the limb is secure enough so it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet fully healed, and you must place it in a suitable position so that it feels no pain; and ensure it is placed correctly, preventing any twisting as it recovers; the quality of the injured limb depends on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It has been said that the broken bones are of various sizes and shapes.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small limbs such as arms and legs: they should be wrapped in soft linen cloth; for larger ones like thighs and legs: they should be wrapped with a wide sturdy bandage, so that the large bandage encircles the entire limb equally without any slack; then place light padding around it three or four turns depending on the size of the limb, and hold fast only at the top of the bandage, then move to above the fracture and tighten less, with the fracture moving slightly away from you; and loosen the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy portion, then take another bandamenent, and wrap directly over the injured area; then return to the section below the fracture, and secure it moderately, neither too tight nor too loose as we have said in the first instruction above; then place evenly spaced padding between the bandages of linen or cloth until they are all equal, then apply a wide bend on top, and then put well-made supports underneath, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a cooling ointment to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it this way for several days; then bind with strips of cloth slightly wider than a large quill, or wood used for making grooves, or palm leaves, in this manner.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 However, it is necessary that the strap applied to the fracture be slightly wider and longer than the others; its length should correspond to the size of the limb, either small or large. Then bind with strips in the same way as you did for the first fracture, then over a string promptly, just like on the initial fracture; tighter it becomes, gradually less so. It is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax linen; because if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the works of peasleteers who make ropes from flax fibers, this is a great mistake, for the splint cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two finger widths between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pained by the edges of the stitches after being tightened too much in healthy places, they should place lint or ragged cloth under them to prevent chafing.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suffice to extract all splinters from injured limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limbs are large, it is not necessary to always use splints unless after V days or VII, or more depending on the likelihood of an abscess forming; and here is how ancient masters would restore breaks, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to mill walls, mix with abundant egg, and create this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, using it as a common method for the splint restores fractures in various positions, especially among women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of an emplaste to restore fractures and dislocations and torsions: take abareis and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and mugat, each X; myrrh and aloes, each V; alechil VI; and make powder, and the honey with egg yolk. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this emplaste because it has a good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another splint method for torsion: take myrtle and wormwood, nine days; cinnamon and aloes, nineteeen days; ginger six days; cardamom ten days, crush well, and pound with water or abundant egg white, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of resetting dislocated joints and realigning bones from their proper positions provides relief for sudden pain, and if fractured, take new linen, and the meal mixed with ease and oil cooked, and place it on the site.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These poultices do not restore but are beneficial in cooling abscesses and properly alleviating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of bandaging to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthy parsley leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of resetting to restore the broken bone and to soothe the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take roots of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour from each part; and grind, then mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply the mixture with wet coriander water or just water, and do so.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way of draining more than the first, when an abscess is hard to heal on the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of vetch, and seed of flax, balm, mallow, melilotus, and marigold, all in equal parts; grind them up and mix with saltwater or fresh water, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not place anything other than wax and oil on a broken limb for restoration, and it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that on must place dry and slightly warm things, such as myrrh, balm, frankincense, and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of incision for injury and pain: take mugwort and horsehair clippings, or bird feathers, and wormwood, all equal amounts, and grind them, then make an ointment with the powdered mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then slightly move it again, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain or has lost bone alignment; if they do suffer from discomfort at the joint, swelling, restlessness, or itching, act quickly and reset the limb, then drain immediately; apply a light dressing, use a wet sponge in water, and soak the area until the itch subsides and pain is relieved, let it rest for an hour, then wrap with dry, moistened linen or oil-soaked wool on top of a cotton ball; allow the inflammation of the limb to subside, alleviate the pain, then resume gentle resetting and slightly more draining, but do not force it as before. Continue until healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see pus and redness and pain and swelling of the whole bone, and you need opiate and bandaging, then reset it as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If nothing of what we have said occurs in the limb, do not dislocate it for more than three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it unattended for twenty days, as is often seen, until the fracture heals, and approaches the proper alignment of the joint above; then you should hold it even tighter than before, and strengthen its flesh, as I have said earlier; and if you see that it becomes dry more than necessary, know that no movement will come about; so provide this with warm water each time you dislocate it, every day, and loosen the bandage occasionally. In this way, movements are prevented in the limb, and quickly address what foolish healers do, which return the limb out of place: it is a bad practice, and I see nothing else but laziness and working improperly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many ways of breaks are, and various forms, and the causes are distinguished. For there are breaks that are caused by spear percussion, wherein the neck bone separates all the way up to the sacral region which is below the spine; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hatchure.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts through the bone from above without being pierced, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, crack, or stone in the bone, or a fall on a stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is an open wound that reaches up to the skin just below or above the bone, where it lies on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that has been sutured back into the bone as delicate as hair follicles, and it is a small fissure, hence this break is called "capillary."; and if the wound is made by being pierced with a stone, or falling, or similar causes, and allows entry of a piece of bone, and the space above the cut is as narrow as when locksmiths strike on their anvils, so within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this occurs more in those whose bones at the head are moist, as in children's heads; and it happens in all kinds of breaks where small pieces are dislocated similarly; and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all methods of fractures through traction upon them, and examination with touches, and by the corruptible cartilage that is thereon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when the bone has been discovered and rubbed thoroughly upon it, resulting in a clear break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	The cure the on the vint la pere maude, and discomfitur, douleur l'apostrement de les tement, et is not fie, and of les semblue.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an uncertain sign of hope, yet expect healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one should remove the bone on the fourteenth day at the time which you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is not spoiled, and come the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the bone break reaches just to the cloth covering the brain, you must split it thus: and take the head from where the patient is injured, exposing the bone in all ways possible; and as smooth as the wound's surface allows, if blood flow occurs during the exposure of the bone or abscesses appear, seek help as needed, ensuring that you fill the space with linen soaked in rose oil; then let the wound rest until the swellings are calmed and bleeding is controlled; afterward, start removing tissue around the bone, which should be done according to these treatment methods: one method involves cutting close to the narrow front part of the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second way is that you have various thrusts of different lengths, some narrow and others wide, with points, and made of iron rods; and in lighter work, do not strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, it must be that you pierce around it so as to make thrusts with taps, not too deeply lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point that does not allow the point to go past the bebone; you need several of these, enough for each section of the bone's thickness, so have taps for all tests; this is the form of the three ways of tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the bone is to place a tap on the bone and then turn it until you know that the bone is pierced; then move the tap slightly elsewhere, doing this all around, then cut with incisors the space of the balled which is between the pricks, and do this more delicately than possible, lightly, as we have said, so long as you work on the bone to your hand or any one of the tools that you have like pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 When you have pierced the bone and cut, it is necessary to address the readiness that has been prolonged by the bone from all other instruments similar to a chisel; but it must be more diligent and subtle than the other chisel; and if there are no small bones or scales remaining, lightly treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is what the Galenists say, which is sweeter; and you must boil it very strongly, as they instruct.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and once you have exposed that part, place it under the top edge of this lens-shaped incisor, which has the following shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut too deeply, and the part is numb in both sides, so that the cutting tool is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet underneath it to gently break the entire bone, while ensuring you take care of the membrane above; if it's near the bone, handle the bone gently, for we do not harm it too much, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and is neatly cut slightly above, resulting in small pieces, then you must address the roughness again, removing scales with a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities to treat each area as most suitable according to the work involved and the nature of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are many large razors needed, then after using finer ones as well, continue to do so until it is done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair trimming and delicate fractures, it is necessary to treat them according to their direction; and this is something that cannot be reversed for those who have studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the eye socket is exposed, it is necessary that you take a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, moisten with oil rose, and place it over the wound; then take another bandage folded into two or three layers, moisten with wine and oil rose, and place it above the first bandage; and do this gently so as not to burden the eye socket, then treat on top of it with a medicinal substance without stretching it more than needed to just cover the wound alone; leave it thus for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and administer remedies like lily root decoction, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologist, and similar things; from these make a powder, apply to the wound, and add more medicines without mordanting; ensure that the wound is clean without leaving any ointment or residue of cloth, as when cloth gathers on the brain's veil, it will harden and press down, causing great harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that if anything unfortunate happens to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain but without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if darkness does not come through the medicine applied on it, that its virtue is effective, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and wine in cloth, and apply it to the wound; then treat according to suitable remedies until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is said that the two parts above do not break if only one moves at a time, for they are bones; and the joint below is cartilaginous and does not break, but rather swells or twists before healing.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must sew your thumb or finger hole, and place the break similarly to your index finger, and through the same pouch as before, until the thread returns to its natural form; do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the elbow and cannot bring the arm to its place, it is fitting that you set it level with a small branch.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, do it similarly again, and strive to restore within the first day; if not possible, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling has calmed down, then sew with lin thread at the head of the hole if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another with a band on the other side, if there is a breakage present; and let the swellings be such that they fill the nostrils completely.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some healers say you must boil the threads with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems to me not entirely right, but it must be boiled in a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then let the thread dry until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never should one place goose feathers in the nostrils instead of swelling treatment, and if there is a .i. piece of cloth near it, this causes dislocation, and blows the illness upon them; rather do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	When an abscess is found near the nose while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or use a small amount of diacron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if no abscess comes forth, then apply the poultice promptly, made of barley flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, followed by placing light gauze; and do not tie it too tightly. If the bone fracture is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract as appropriate fragments, then align the fissure, and treat any strange wounds such as cuts or burns, just like poultices and ointments suitable for this; if there are no injuries within the bones, cure with threads soaked in pus.
de la routure de la mandibule	For a dislocation of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there are no resulting wounds, and the fractures are minor only, it should be examined lightly for complications inside.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	by and s1
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	If the fracture of the jaw is dislocated into two parts, it must be managed by adjusting the extension until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if dislocations of the spine occur or lumps form, then bind with a thread of gold or silver or silk; place on the broken jaw ceramic paste and a double cloth; lay over the cloth a large well-made stele or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, tying it where you want, and instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate again after three days and then set it back as it is changing; place a poultice on top, with powder from the mill or wheat flour mixed with plenty of egg or sesame, after you have removed the ceramamoist; place a light linen over the poultice, and if the poultice hurts, let the position of the patient remain unchanged until it is healed; many times it has been healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, treat as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, no bone fragment remains in place; gently remove the splinters as we have instructed before.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it to an appropriate size according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	the ne:
de la forcele	Of great strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fractures break several times in front of the shoulder, and the breakage is in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two, with fragments present, and easier to repair; or there is a breakage with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatments are when there is a breakage with an accompanying wound, so that you have two assistants; one who washes the shoulder affected by the fracture, and another extends the neck towards the area; then aligns the break to your shoulders correctly, such that there is no appearance or unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	When you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round stick of cloth or woolen material, and make it thick according to your necessity; then stretch and release the tension, hold the stick in your hand, placing equal breaks as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the top of the stick with ease because it comes out at the front, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their side, and places under the shoulder half an iron bar; place the assistants' shoulders against it, until the bone in the forearm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then you reach for the break to your elbangs, and if it is still broken, so that you cut underneath; gently extract the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any splinting, apply with a copestone from one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the forearm to prevent swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it appears like a spoon, and is not sharp; its width should be as much as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the work; have two heads, as you see, one wider and the other narrower, just as with the shape of the wound from when you set the bones; and when you are certain there is no heat from the abscess, measure the wound, and if it's small or doubtful hot, then dress the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are multiple abscesses, apply an oil-soaked cloth and linen with wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The compression of the bone when it is without wounds and without cuts, you should place on the bprise the powdered dust of molten lead and ox fat, then put light plasters over that, also use a stick under the knee if necessary; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then lay double cloths over the plaster, along with the lead paste; then take a thin rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so its head hangs evenly; place the rod on the fracture, turn the bandage from the knee, and away from both the healthy and unhealthamalide leg; connect each part separately, and when you see the ligature holds the fracture in position clearly, and that the rod does not move above the bone broken, restrain it every day; and if the straps loosen, re-tighten them. Lay the unhealthy patient on his back, and put a small pillow under the knee to elevate the joint while he sleeps; this will alleviate pressure from the fracture by supporting the shoulder, or you may tie their arm to the neck, ensuring they do not accidentally dislocate it until XX days have passed; then restart the powdered lead if needed, and retain and release it as such, until restored. It is usually fully healed in up to twenty-eight days, but less for some individuals.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Sometimes the shoulder is broken or dislocated and cannot be moved; it should not be forced except by touching. Arrange according to the fracture pattern, and set the joint in its natural form in all ways possible; then put on the place powder from ground oats with plenty of oil, and light gauze; then put a double layer over it; then place a wide and thin board slightly wider than the shoulder, so that you can clamp the arm at any point on the shoulder using linen thread cuts equally; and then strain all firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and watch the joint each day; and every time it moves, strain again, and align the board if it is out of place, and have the patient lie down with his side up; and after a certain number of days or weeks (XX to XXV), when these numbers are completed, release the clamping, and be cautious, for it is not bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a bone fragment is sticking out and not covered by skin, cleanse the area, and treat the bone, following what we have said in treating fractures of strong animals with pus-filled abscesses.
de la brisure dou pis	Then pour l’os, seize et sutet a painful-soient lepour les sting that are you and swelling to the wound and if it. Et sirop-tie os. And also have-cours-se tion, which cauter que la ploose with un-done or infection and l’os de lien ete ou malaidez les pricking:
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The foot is sometimes fractured within a day, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks later on.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is fractured within, if it inclines downwards, the patient feels great pain, and lacks support, and swelling, and perhaps has vomited blood, with movement noticeable in the broken bone, and this causes much discomfort.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is to make the patient lie on their back, and place a pillow between their shoulders, then press the shoulder blades, and join the two ribs with hands, adjusting in all ways possible until the bone's shape is correct; then apply bandages and cotton over the fracture delicately, wrapping it in a cloth so that it does not move. Shape the strap roundly on the back, stretch it gently, loosen every hour as needed, and if it softens, tighten again; and if you need to remove it due to corrosion or itching at the site, pain or abscess, do so quickly, remove it carefully, cleanse the wound area, then follow the usual treatment methods.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs mostly on their sides after the back and within the head, and they do not bend easily because they are gristly; and they feel well at the inquiry with fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And healing is such that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply the splint, and secure with a strap if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards the head, it causes great pain and swelling to the patient, just like pleurisy, because the bone has no flesh; they also have fever, vomiting, and a large amount of blood loss, which is a serious illness, and the ancients used significant remedies for it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And of those who say that it should be treated with meats that inflame the stomach to drive away the obstruction quickly.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause abscesses to appear in vain if they have not come yet.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come to pass, so he is whole.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one places cups on the limb to draw out humors, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups may attract excesses to the limb due to its weak condition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the limb with moistened linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the heat, then proceed with treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the unset bone, and there is doubt in them, then it must be decided to split near the fractured rib location, and an instrument should be used for protection; then one must cut the bone, gently pull apart, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with splints until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess comes to pass, then place on it with cloths soaked in oily rose oil, and position over the affected area; and while curing the location of the abscess as required, keep it lying down along the side or where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	From a fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a break to the bone in the neck, and rarely does it bow; likewise to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, be cautious if you see their hands become softened and swollen and lifeless, unable to move or stretch out, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that they are in various deadly conditions, and if they move and feel well when strained but not touched, understand that the bone joint is intact, and that the patient will be healed if given treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 If such things occur in the spine of the back, and you see if it is sane or not, be careful if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents that need hands, and on the back they jump with windiness and ejection without will; and when it has been sovened on its belly, then it jumps with ejection without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if, after being sovened on its back and wanting to rise, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Says that they are deadly: do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, it is a more manageable condition.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply oil of rosemary or olive oil if there's an abscess, until it's soothed; then place it under a supportive and dry compressor, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, apply heat to the affected area; then set the bone, and stitch together the two edges of a large wound with a sealing stitch, until healed; and if the shoulder joint of the arm is fractured, also known as "shoulder blade," place your left hand's pouchet on it, holding it equal to your right hand at full strength; then apply an enhancer compressor and cooling cloth over it, if needed; then hold firmly, and if there are dislocated bones, correct them, and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there has not been a slight narrowing at the top; they become longer, slope towards the foot, causing pain in place and swelling where it's broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the fracture; and determine which part of the bone and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the top, then match the fracture to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	by;tum Tes words: Mbui corre ceformte t; Don’s the acit; (or les tre estl'estra (th<brlement le ou . So nde n’dn a, and the resacue et a.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it evenly, place it on the splint, then put a wooden or iron bar underneath, and strain the breakage so that it does not move; and let the limb rest beneath the ribs until they are aligned again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to lie on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down; then apply what we have mentioned before; and then proceed to restoration, and strain as necessary, unless there is any further injury; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then you must restore according to one of the two methods; that you take a piece of soft leather in this way.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	or ise l'enem :
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you sway the patient on their forearm, and tie the hand to their neck, then command two assistants so one dyes the part above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wax all around; they stretch each apart.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is further out, hold the ligaments from under the break, and on both sides of the break, and extend each member to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 If the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it is proper to place a splint behind the elbow and another over the arm, below the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is toward the forearm, it must be placed with slight force without labor until the fracture is level with the area, and with the forearm; then adjust evenly as needed, unless abscesses occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if inflammamoins occur, do not reset it until after six days, and apply a cloth soaked in oil or ointment to ease the inflammation; then reset, and the way of resetting is that you place the plaster on the dislocation, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand under the shoulder or near the breast; and wrap it, and hold firm at the joint above the shoulder, until the limb is straight if nothing hinders, unless the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you suspect the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a wider and stronger splint than the others, with two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes beyond the fracture three finger-widths from either side; then strain across the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on treating fractures, applying greater pressure while gradually reducing.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the seat of abscesses and swelling from what we have said, in the hour when you restore the fractured limb, and doubt that an abscess is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days the binding, ensuring no inflammation or vein occurs at the location due to excessive stretching.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If approached as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 If no such events occur, do not dislocate until after III days or more, and the patient sleeps on their back, with hands on their stomach; place I cushion of plain wool evenly under the shoulder, and watch each hour during the day or night to ensure that the fractured limb does not move or the ligaments are softened. Proceed by the power of medicine, and give them the food we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when they start to regain strength, it should be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and limb should be reset in all within XL days; then one may dislocate them again and administer baths and ointment medicines to straighten the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is unsightly and swollen, it remains dislocated for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	Of a break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones called "phalanges," one small, holding the palm, and one large, extending above to the little finger; sometimes only the large phalange is broken, or only the small, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small veins are broken, restoration is easy, and healing; when the large ones are broken, the treatment is poor, and more painful than if they were all together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only the small veins that are broken, one must gently stretch them and align properly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it's the large veins, then one must stretch them more firmly; extend above the cushion, and elevate the patient's hand higher than others, while positioning smaller ones lower, with crossed limbs at the same level so that the patient does not experience any strain; then gently extend the assistant's arms towards the area below their hand or near a ligament, with other assistants on either side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place the dislocation back evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, place each one back to its place, and if any are misaligned that do not fit their socket, then straighten them as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking into pieces and wounds, I have spoken to each individual surgeon; they take up the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if during the initial restoration there arise boils with pus, a poultice of balm made from rose oil and white wax should be applied so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and apply the poultice gently over all the boils until they are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then remove the poultice, and apply a plaster of powdered ointment with an abundance of egg whites; place the splints, ensuring they are more firmly fixed than others and slightly wider; know that it should have six or seven splints in different arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; apply firmer pressure near the fracture than elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the dressings over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and use linen threads for binding, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have described.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And reward the member and the ligament after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident happens to the member, as itching that comes upon the limb, you shall wash the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the strapping, if the ligaments are softened and the bone is relieved, as well as similar things; that suffices.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a little and let it be so for several days until the swelling subsides, then resume tightening.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then reset the dislocation up until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or in that case, then pin the hands to his neck and they are levelled, and beware of movement and sedimentation, and sleeps on his back; know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	He says that on the back of the hand there are few fractures, but they occur many times bent.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it requires that the patient bend his knees crosswise and stands erectly straight before him; then he places his hand under the extended thigh, extends the ministers over the broken bones, and sets them in alignment as long as they are well joined; and applies a bandage and stitches, if there is an abscess, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the fracture, and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is around the tooth root near the sole of the foot, make a splint out of linen cloths and instruct the patient to press it against the broken area; then stretch from a long piece of cloth, making sure the support is as wide and large as the palm's breadth, and hold in place appropriately.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forehead, it must be placed with a splint above and another below on the sole, ensuring that the hand remains open and straight, then tie the entire area around the hand, securing the joints between them.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our joints, if it is a dislocation, position it equally as needed; and hold with the sole, and see if you place a small straight splint to lift the dislocation without movement; and if the fracture is at other joints like the index or others, position them equally, and bind with the healthy bone that follows; or bind all together in one tie so they may move as needed, or place a splint above it, as I have described; and pay attention to restoration and abscess treatment, and dress any wounds that occur, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often fractured, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration consists in using a ligature above the break and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on their face, then extend each of the ministers to his respective part equally; and it is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the base of the thigh, let one ligament be toward the wrist and the other under the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be beside the knee and the extension below; then with his fingers, the bone should be aligned to its natural form by both hands, and then place the splint, without any swelling occurring.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess present, allow it to heal first then return to your craft and care; the lithotomy is done in a particular manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary that you wrap above the fracture with a doubled durable bandage in two or three layers, leaving an excess for wrapping; then rotate the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee, below it; let the end of the thread be above. Then rotate the leg and the thigh with the bandage again, then place an oblong stiffener over the fracture, and put another on the leg bone; then lay a softer cloth between the leg and the thigh to achieve even tension, then start binding firmly in three or four turns around the fracture; the more you move up from the fracture, the less tight it should be. Then go back with two ends of the thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three fasteners above them, until you reach near to the foot; then if the binding does not move in its place, leave it so, and then check for any swelling or other signs of inflammation.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it occurs and the dislocation happens again, do as follows: if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then one should widen the opening; if not possible, break into the joint, extract the bone fragments; treat the injury as we have said many times, until healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the thigh broken in this manner as with the shoulder and arm; however, such a method of restoration does not cause harm to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 1 day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the groove of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know well that in the groove of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not much but a split or piercing wound, and leads to all kinds of injuries, and feels like very good pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts equal pressure where there are depressions on its sides, until they can be moved - then place the splint, and if necessary, put a round stake (stele), and strain it as needed, then follow all the precautions we have described for other breaks such as hot boils and similar things; apply to each accident what is appropriate, until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	f crap ses que et tir ma peu: s :
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "shinbone," and the other is called "fibula"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and hence the treatment is just as for the arm, and the workings are all within it. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is fractured, there is great pain and it can be seen clearly; and the vein turns off.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then make an adjustment and align it evenly, and secure the ligaments equally; however, you must ensure that there is no unsightly fracture, and if there are other pieces present, then the extension should be minor and easier to manage; and proceed according to your judgment.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of dressed wood that wrap the leg from one side to another, and are as long as the leg from the groin to below; then wrap it in two layers with a band above and below, and tie them tightly together so that the leg does not tilt to either left or right, thus making it well-set; and no one should administer any other treatment for the length of the leg if it is made of wood, and they place it as a splint to prevent movement, properly applied at the fracture site where there is an open wound; each day move the leg to check for pus or any other accident, and care for it until it becomes healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the bone fracture of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle there is no fracture, but to the bone of the foot comes no break and to the bones near it, and nothing occurs that causes concern or various conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it occurs that the bone of the foot is fractured, and you see these bones protruding from each other, place such poorly set feet on the ground as though they were about to walk, then put your own foot under theirs where the bones are elevated, press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and stuff it with cotton at .ij. chiés (two fingers) thickness, secure it again to the affected foot, then wrap with bandages around it, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you may remove the splint, for you will find that the bones are aligned and fused together, either broken or set correctly.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If any of the bones are broken, repair them as we have said with arm bones; then put a splint on the injured limb according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place the board I mentioned under the leg, and quickly straighten it; if there are two or three, or more, breakages, place a splint for each one according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot so that their upper edge is above the abdomen.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary not to forget the other things I have said about other fractures; and treat each injury as needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the bone break in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if she wishes to sit upright, then lean her back towards the pained side and support with hands; then fill the bladder with cotton from a cloth as large as possible, and insert it in such manner; then help her stand, and gradually lift her buttocks, until the cotton reaches the entrance of nature (vagina), and restores the bone with its position; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once done, allow her to reset herself, repeating this for seven days or so: the fracture will be healed. If you wish to do more, take a goat's bladcu and tie it at the end with a string, then fill the entire bladder into nature (vagina); blow air through the tied string until the bladder is deflated: nature will return its normal shape; then fill it with cotton again, leaving it for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 When the bone of the forearm is broken, or in women, repair it as we have said with the hip bone; and these fractures should not be hidden from those who apply their study and use to this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For a break indicates various conditions that provide the right way for restoration: thus it is true.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the fracture is to be reculer l'endroit li plixque lesditees: si tuet li estraie i d’en qui plus que le boute la, et de li nus vergete, ne do il est ront; puis quittere mourme.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is for those who have fractures with wounds, especially if they are large like the hip or shoulder bones or similar ones, that they should be well-aligned now, as indicated by the splints we have mentioned.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, and there's no inflammamoin of vitriol, then if you have nothing else, continue to restore the fracture at the same time as that day or next, unless pus comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	When abscesses appear, leave the restoration until the new moon, as long as the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch or bandage it either on the second or fourth day, lest you bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If broken bones are appearing near the skin and exposed, it is necessary to gently realign them with your hands, applying slight pressure.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If it is difficult to realign extensions with your hands alone, take the iron instrument which has six or eight long claws and the width depends on the wound's size; thus, the doctor should grip three or four (depending on how many are needed for each fracture treatment); they should be round and slightly larger, so that it does not buckle under pressure to the member at work, and have a thickness in front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palanching," so the head of the shoulder must be placed under the visible part of the bone; and turn once until they are level with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the swelling cannot well take hold of the bone, it is necessary to cut away the head of the bone until the swelling has opportunity.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for this, whether it be a saw or chisel to your ability; next remove whatever is lodged in the hardness and small splinters of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, believe that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If you have placed it in its natural position, then moisten the dressing with a sticky black ointment, and properly so that it is well applied; do not put any cream or other substances on the wound unless necessary, as this may cause decay and contamination; after restoring the bone, leave the wound exposed, covering it completely according to the size of the wound, and ensure it is well protected so that the wound is not strained with the breakage; many have done this, resulting in death or corruption at times. The tension should be less severe and more gentle than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 If the wound is large or bad, and you suspect it may have been caused by a sudden accident as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not apply ointments; but wrap around it, near the wound, with durable cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days that pus has formed in the wound, remove what you have applied earlier, and apply healing ointment to the wounds, as with the Tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar preparations.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary for you to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes firm and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	heu, and thet des le temps et thou chest ifst de la gis tre est les;
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this continues for many days, it cannot be joined but returns repeatedly with a bowing motion, as there are small fragments of bone, so you must carefully open the wound and remove all these displaced pieces which cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula appears at the site or other form of decay occurs, it is necessary to treat it as described in this chapter here before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 When the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, as with the hip or shoulder bones, among similar large body parts, do not attempt to pull it out, for often death ensues, but leave it until it heals; perhaps after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you know how; and if you don't know, just let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And for bruises that occur around a swelling.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, the unsightly appearance of the limb can be seen; and by chance, it may not be able to perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take note then if you use any medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, gum arabic, acacia, or similar substances; whether you take none of these things individually or all together, mix them with astringent wine or an abundance of honey or spices; place it in the stomach envelopes well, and do not loosen them on consecutive days; then remove it, and start again another one until the inflammation is gone like bone; you strain under a piece of leather well made; because the property of the leather is that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the inflammcuation has turned as hard as stone or similar material, and needs to be removed, so do the excess clearly; then take it to any barber shaved off completely until gone, and treat until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The member which is weak after childbirth
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored and remains after weak and delicate limbs for many causes: one because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many ligaments, which did not allow proper circulation to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of very large movements at inappropriate times; or because there is little blood left in its body, so they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the care is to make the patient eat well and keep his body supple, until the blood multiplies within him; and give him baths, and bring him joy and comfort; then apply heat to the limb so that the pores draw great nourishment, often cleansing it with water frequently until circulation reaches the limb; and he returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The member becomes twisted after health is restored.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken openly, and the shape of the affected limb appears ugly, yet it does not deviate from its natural course: do not believe those who say that one must entirely break down a member anew, as many foolish people have done in our land; such practices are blamed, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if the dislocations and twists are recent, it is necessary to treat them with warm water or softened herbs cooked like wormwood leaves, roots, melilotus seeds, and similar substances; apply a mollifying plaster as well-made diaquilon, take wormwood muscatel juice, mix with goose grease or sesame oil, then place the plaster on it. Alternatively, use fatty figs crushed with flaxseed flour, and other medicines that alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And never is there a fracture from rubbing continuously and thoroughly with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And make sure to move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	It is to be put on the bone of the sore it with care and diligent, immediately apply, as prescribed by leprochee de pains au dret les l’ostee, et si a le mieux teneur ou se, et si bon est la plaie par.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to any part, one must now return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if delayed, and the swelling is too painful to reset it quickly; therefore, do not move the limb at the hour it is inflamed: many times this causes bruising and other pains; however, when this occurs, apply a warm water and oil compress to ease the abscess, then gently exercise each member as the proper treatment comes into place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the sections on shoulder dislocation up to fingers.
des mandibules	Of the lower jawbones.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated outward, and the dislocation of both is by two ways: either they are slightly ossified from their places, and softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated, hanging toward the back, causing saliva from the mouth that prevents it from being held in, unable to close its mouth, and wrapping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, they return by various arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is complete and in place, you must reset urgently without hesitation, and in such a way that the medic soaks the patient's head with wine, and inserts the mirror shallowly from one of his hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, where the dislocation is of both sides; the other hand must be ready to make it even. Command the afflicted to soften their lower jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And places the mirror evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the repositioning is difficult, especially when they are both jawbones together, with warm water and oil, until they can be gently moved; do not force them to move as we have instructed.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without any tension, then place a cloth moistened with an ointment made of rose oil and wax on it, then lightly bind him with soft cords; let the afflicuted lie down on his back, and have his eyes between two pillows so that he does not move to either side or strain himself from yawning. Let them eat gentle food as long as the pains are gone, and until their lower jaws become moistened and healthy; then serve him what he wants lightly, without opening his mouth for eating or drinking while his mandibles are well-moistened and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not returned to their original positions, then fever and familiar soreness come, and perhaps intestinal perforation, and sometimes they vomit clear phlegm.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then say it is peritons; and many times death comes to those who have it, in seven days.
de la forcelle	Of the fistula.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot hold within itself along the ribcage continuation and the buttocks, and it is not dislocated at any time by chance, and this can be felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 The restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then you press the joint firmly with your palm, and it returns; then place a staff and bandages over it, and hold; and the shoulder which is towards the elbow cannot dislocate again; if not, and if it does dislocate once more, reset it to its original position as we have said; then place a staff and bandages over it, hold, and let the patient rest until they are well; similarly, bring back the collarbone when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 It is said that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one where it dislocates towards the lower part of the arm; and the second occurs at the upper end; sometimes it happens above, but rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards or within the nerves; and often it dislocates downwards towards the humerus, especially for those with little strength, as they do so quickly; for those with enough strength, it pops out easily and goes back in easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to certain people with a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot boil, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you test it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that dislocation occurs when it moves towards the shoulder joint, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity evident; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and below the shoulder to where the head of the shoulder is located, similar to that of ears; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place nor move in any way; similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, as you can clearly see at the joint; and this type of dislocation is not solenly to be reset when new or if the child is unwell.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then removes the shirt under the elbow, and lifts the joint forcefully upright to its place; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, placing it back down gently, which will happen swiftly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and nourished with soothing agents such as an infusion of althea, fenugreek, and honey, and treated thusly; then lay the child on their back, placing a bandage below the affected shoulder that is neither too soft nor too hard, positioning the foot over the bandage, gently lifting the top of the shoulder, and massaging the patient's hand; another caregiver may dye the head of the afflicted arm so it does not move downwards; observe if the joint returns correctly following this method: you should make present a man who is larger than the child; he should stand facing their side, lift the dislocated shoulder below the affected arm, and raise the arm upwards, allowing the child's hand to hang freely; another caregiver may massage the patient's hand downward towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, place with him any heavy object, so that the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the joint can be reset in another way: and it is that one sticks a long stick into the ground so that the shoulder returns as if on a pivot, and it is neither too large nor too narrow; then place under the patient with cloths for support, and let their arm hang down; then extend their hand to the other side properly, and the joint will return quickly to its place; and if it does not return despite all these things we have said, do this cure: take a stick of six feet in length and four inches wide, which has a head recessed to allow insertion directly underne.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the fur on the patient's head covered with cloth so that it does not slip and cause pain to the patient, then put the shoulder underneath the patient; extend both arms over the length of the fur, and attach the shoulder to the fur, and bring the arm to the front towards the hand, then place the arm under a wide shelf's edge, let the hands hang downward on one side: now hold the joint in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done in any way you see fit, if necessary place a spoon of wool under the elbow, then apply the plaster with powdered substances, incense and frankincense to the entire shoulder area, then stretch the joint quickly, turn the bandage over the plaster, and wrap the hand around its neck, allowing the hands to remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little while the limb remains comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or six days, and move it; if it becomes firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or other causes, it is necessary that you apply three punctures with fire as described in this chapter on cautery treatments.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it remains dislocated after six and a half days, and the joint cannot be lifted or raise the arm forward, then know that the nerve at the shoulder blade is pinched or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never lock into place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs towards the back and limbs, or behind, is caused by a blow and extension of hands, and you must treat it with another remedy; and care until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb, and tardiness in movement, often does the patient suffer greatly, until that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the shoulder joint dislocation occurs at points and returns to them; if it is dislocated in all parts, especially front and back, and the dislocations are not repositioned, as one can clearly see and feel; they occur according to each configuration.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the affected limb with its healthy counterpart, if you see it clearly open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset as soon as abscesses occur, for if they come, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes not all can be reset entirely, especially when it's in the back; this is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	The restoration is, when it can be reseted, that you stretch its hand to your two hands; and the arms are spread wide, and the fingers according to the bone around, above and below, place the joint back together or at the root of its palm until they return to their original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if dislocation is at the front, it returns when the hand doubles over to itself, and the root of the palm's hinge that has become dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to its place, give strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, and they bind them with each other so that it cannot move during the extension; then turn the arm from both sides, after you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when the wound at the joint reaches the patient's hand, anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, and set the joint firmly until it returns; and once it is in place, apply dry olive oil with egg white, strain thoroughly, then stretch the arm towards the injured side, and let it rest for some days before unbinding.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten properly, reapply the poultice and bandage, leaving it for several days until it is securely set before releasing.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 If it experiences weakness after the joint's resetting and it moves, then bathe and rub well, pressing until soothed; or place a fat sheep grease on the joint, leave for a day and night, then bandage, and let it take a bath; when it sweats, rub the joint tenderly, then reapply the grease, followed by another bath; thus do this twice or three times, until healed; if you see, put moist wheat bran warmed with butter on it, and strain over.
li dislocation de la main	Hand dislocation
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is lightweight compared to other joints. It must be hastily brought back to place in the same hour it becomes dislocated; thus when the finger swells or if an abscess appears hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The repositioning is such that you place the patient's hand on a stool, extend their fingers and mirror them, so they put their palm over the joint area and press until it returns completely; then you must check if it is properly placed; thereafter, have the patient rest their back against a stalled for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 When dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the healer should put his hand under that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, then well; if not, apply soothing poultices to abscesses and wounds, leaving them as the pain begins anew.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if it cannot be endured, and you are unable to reset it after any days, as the joint remains crooked; and do not demand that the patient exert his hand until it is discolored, nor strain anything at all: then know that a nerve or artery has been cut, or there is no other remedy than to try to straighten by fire near the casing, but perhaps nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put on the splint we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and let it be like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no cracking sound, warm the area with hot water, and rub until smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of thumb dislocations in the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 At no time are the two bones of the hand dislocated on either side, nor at the back of the palm or belly; then they are fixed, and dislocation is set in place by wrapping bandages until it returns, then support the top of the joint, and tilt toward the part where it is disjointed; leave for two days, then put straight on that day; and from there tie it up as we have said, and loosen daily, and make move, and reset in place; do this often until it becomes narrow, and do likewise if dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is aligned; and do likewise when dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	By dislocation of the spinal column of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spinal column of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations and no treatment, for death quickly approaches to harm the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 The signs are that the ejections fall without volition, cannot be held, and many times any limb is softened, such as both hips or either of the two arms or one; many times the spine moves in four parts; those moved at the back are called "gilbositez": the cure for this is to re-align when gilbositee comes from childhood; if there is no cure nor healing throughout.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that come from falling or impacts or similar causes are treated by old methods with great words, which do not always yield great benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention and formed extracts in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the gangrenous condition coming to the chest forward, there is neither remedy nor health; and similarly the one occurring straight into the ribs, where it cannot be cured except by treating precisely what comes to the back, as I have said; and it should be that the patient lies extended on his face evenly, and has strain away from him so he does not turn; then insert a hot iron at the head neatly into the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the assailed parts of the patient, and another around the hips, and the knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the bandages, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the two irons; they should be tightly fastened as we have said, and the physician places his palms firmly along the spine evenly until it straightens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three handspans long, and chevieve from the appearance, positioning the patient on their side, then place the head of the stick under the appearance, then put the middle of the stick over the spine; place the ends of the stick against the other end of the head, and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see that it turns like a windlass which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you should set two fires on the head of the arm about one handspan long and towards the other hands another handspan apart; between each fire, there should be an ample space of length both above and below it; each fire should have apertures or vents that face correct direction, and they must be firmly placed in the ground so they do not move; between each two fires there should be a turning fire on which to turn the windlass with ropes, and there should be small fires of an ample length for turning the windlass; then tie the rope among the handles to the main windlass head towards the arm, and the other handle rope towards the hand in the opposite windlass, and each assistant turns their winder as we have instructed.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are equalized, place the drying bandage with an abundance of egg whites, and then the plasters, and then the splint from a tablet of three fingers long, which ensures that it holds the spot of inflammation and the healthy part of the spine; then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and ensure the patient undergoes subtle easing until they are healed; and if anything occurs at the end regarding their health, administer softening and soothing medicines along with the splint that we have mentioned beforehand; and never insert a piece of wood, nor does it come to pass in the rear spinal column, and one thinks it is dislocation; but it is the bone opening up, so there should be no presumption: perhaps this would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	regarding hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Joints of the knee and shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, not like other joints; the knee joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, front and back; more within than outside, less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the recognition of its dislocation is such that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the injured joints are more prominent than those on the sound side, and the injured cannot double their hip in fire; and there is swelling near an abscess hot, because the hip socket comes close.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those for whom it occurs with delay, is such that this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who suffer in front are such that their leg is well straightened; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot beforehand, holds in its urine, swells with anger, and when walking, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who suffer in back are such that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the hip reaches to the level behind the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The recurrences of this type of dislocation are such that it must be relocated promptly, and its duration depends on its nature, there is no remedy; and one must not have the slightest illusion.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, quickly return the joint, push it inward and outward, and move to right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must select a strong minister and support the leg strongly with two hands or bind them above the hip; other assistants should place their hands under the ankles, then gently pull one band over the hip; others hold the head by the band. They all stretch upward and downward at once, until the injured person is raised from the ground in a single motion and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If this is not so, then it requires attention when the dislocation affects the jawbone, one must support the patient's chin with their own hand, then apply a ligature at the base of the hip, extend the ligature towards the groin, and upwards towards the thigh; then engage other assistants for their arms and embrace the large dislocation on the affected hip, extending it away properly: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot press it in this manner as we have said, then bind the two feet of the affected person together with a strong band below on both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended further than the other; then hang from the head of a beam, and above ground level the arms outstretched; then command one minister that they embrace the chest, and have others hanging alongside with the afflicted person, who properly grasp the hip, for the joints return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 When the dislocation is in the lower part, gently handle the patient as described for those with hernias, and properly straighten the limb's joint; then place two tiles at the head and foot likewise; next insert the tile between the buttocks on the affected side near the form; ensure it is secured by damp cloths so that it does not slip from the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the physician aligns them evenly with his hand to correct the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place on a table and press as we have said for hernias, and handle the patient gently under the ribcage.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before you, it must be hastily extended by hand, and according to what I have said; then place the mirror opposite the painful limb, and press with the other hand, extending down towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 If the dislocation is in place, it does not need to extend the patient's leg or lift off the ground but should be adjusted as if the hip were realigned initially with both hips; positioned on its face and the limb extended as previously stated, pressing onto the joint atop the table. When the patient extends their legs, they will be even; then place the buttocks, apply a bandage, and use one of the bindings so that the hip does not move; rest for three or four days, then release it, and place the cast underneath; if you see them are even, then tie again as before, leaving it for another three days. Then allow the patient to walk gently until the limb is fortified.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joint is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, forward and backward, and not sideways.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 When the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg towards his hip, and if it does not reach its hip, know that it is dislocated; and in the restoration of all this, make the patient sit upright, extend his leg as much as he can, place your back against his face, and put your foot on his feet; then take hold of his thigh with your hands, retract between your thumbs, then bend both knees firmly; other aids are to extend his foot until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it lightly reaches its hip; apply a poultice afterward, straighten the leg against the hip for III or IV days, then release it; do not let the patient move about until the limb is comfortably settled.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not completely healed, provide strong treatment as we have said in the care of the hip, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are at times numb, at times not fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, try before reaching the part where it has been displaced: reductions should be gentle, and it must be stretched gently with hands as soon as possible when barely touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely displaced, one must make the patient sit upright directly, and insert the instrument along the leg above the ankle; then grasp the foot with your right hand, and then once again with your left twice, then extend upwards, and firmly place the foot upwards; do this twice as we have said, pulling and turning the foot. If it returns, that's good; if not, resume the operation, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground with a strap firmly placed between their thighs to prevent movement of the limb; then grasp one thigh and have others extend the foot towards them or its ligament that they hold onto at the neck of the foot. Then each assistant extends evenly, and the straps remain in place between the patient's thighcuits to keep still when stretching; then position mirrors symmetrically for the dislocation on their hands, and other assistants lift the healthy leg from below, and the dislocated part will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 When it reaches the desired point, apply the dressing and plug with wool on top, firmly wrap the bandage around the leg, and watch for nerves behind the ankle to ensure the ties are not too tight; then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the bandage softens, re-tighten the strain; then remove after another day or three days, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if they attempt before this period ends, it is not certain that they will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess occurs there, it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
des dois	And of these two:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	est les bene de la; and sof ;
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any of the joints of your lower back or leg, you must have the patient sit upright or on a straight table, then place their foot under the joint and press firmly, until it returns; and when they are even, and nothing appears to be wrong, place II fingers under the sole of their foot, then bandage it firmly, and leave it for III days, then remove; and let them rest until healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it needs to be repaired, many times the patient dies: do not presume in its treatment unless you are knowledgeable about the art and have practiced it for long, and if you are compassabale and merciful and slow; do not act rashly. Start with calming measures on abscesses first, and let the patient entrust themselves to God's hand, if there is no hope of health; and when there is hope, mend the limb back into place so that the abscess may grow well; and once the limb is in place, administer soothing treatments on the abscess as needed, and tend to the wound appropriately with dried ointments; and if dislocation has caused fractures or small bones are broken, follow what I have said for simple ailments; and avoid going down the path of fear according to what I have said, because it will lead you astray from your duty and harm your body.
Amen	 Now comes to healing.
