O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science in its entirety and made it whole through explanations and by making declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I have received in a vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work on hands, known as "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work on hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, it has been neglected to a great extent; only small descriptions found in books by ancient physicians who treated hand injuries are left behind.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises errors and follies, closing off understanding and knowledge is displaced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And it seems to me that I would like to revive this treatise with the order of exposing and declaring as well as abbreviation; coming together are the forms of instruments for cautery and other apparatuses from surgery along with preparation for their use, so it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been displaced.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	One must instruct the individual to raise themselves in knowledge of anatomy as Galien says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and their number, and their movements and moving vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates says that the one without a tool is very little, and with a tool is much; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that if one is not mindful of the matters previously mentioned, they should be careful not to stray into error and harm people; thus I have often seen many who engage themselves with this science but abandon knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	In this case I saw a mad knight who cut an abscess of hard pimples or the neck of a woman, and severed the veins in her neck; therefore so much blood issued that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another knight who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder itself, and the man died inside within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called upon to assist him; and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if it had not been for his trembling, he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another master who took care of a duke from our land whose leg was broken, and with the break there was also an injury; and the uninformed master straightened the break close to the wound using a strong lever, without leaving any space at the wound; and left it in such condition. And he instructed him not to dislocate it again; and remained thus until the leg was fully healed and the foot recovered, coming near to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I came called by him and was hurriedly brought to dislocate the leg; and when it was dislocated so gently, he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in any case the decay was already settled or member, and could not heal it; and did not stop the decay from spreading through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other mirror which has collapsed an abscess inflamed by its lord's evil intentions.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an ulcer, when it is filled with black bile humor, it should only be touched with iron if part of it can be removed from its place where corruption lies.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son of the surgeon's craft, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in various dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 You must be vigilant so that the foolish may not speak ill of you; if you take up your arms in defense, engage with the sickly easily and firmly, and use the best course through God's grace to come to salvation and be praised; leave behind diseases with serious healing; remove doubts as you do so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take careless illnesses upon yourself lest you be called foolish elders.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise in accordance with the three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and medicinal water cauteries, and the chapters are organized from the head to the feet; and on the forms of swellings, and on welding with cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are of cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and the chapters are organized and on the forms of swellings.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are of repositioning dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and on the forms of swellangs.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each composition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and harm is longer in word and subtle science and secret answers; and on this topic many wise men speak, agreeing with it; but few pay attention to their words, for I return to the essence.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that caustic treatment helps all constitutions where there is matter; for two types of constitutions exist: one being hot with material and the other dry without it.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexion hot and dry together matter, some advise that cautery is of great help; others say the opposite: cautery does not apply to diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of heat is hot and should not be treated for hot diseases by warmth or dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery greatly helps with hot and dry diseases affecting the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body's humors in relation to the nature of heat, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experimentation never.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, only those who have tried it and know the craft of cautery treatments well, as well as the diversity of people's temperaments, their conditions and causes of diseases, and occurrences and duration; regarding other types we do not fear them particularly, especially cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	de lest rashtry that iste:
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my child, that fire cautery together is among the secret treatments and greater mercy than fiery medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that burns it, and harms no other limb if its name be known.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines come from one body part to another in alignment, and bring grave illnesses for the member's healing; and sometimes they kill the patient due to their potency and the goodness of their substance does not work unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experiment and long service in the study of my art; and so it lies on the truth of things. Because of that, I excuse myself for the length of speech, as I do not wish to reveal the secret knowledge contained within these texts or about fire, nor the quality of its workings in curing bodily ailments, as the philosopher demonstrates; but receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know this, son, that they are agreed upon when to make the cauteries, and select praying lines.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say cauteerization is suitable in all cases, as the harm that occurs can be alleviated by its aid; and especially if it's necessary to relieve urgent pains that cannot wait until greater injuries come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	it is not to as d
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there can be things such that the disease occurs at times according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the illness and its power; and are combined in him excesses due to the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered either where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauteries for gout and such ailments, so that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and cauteres are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer our cautere, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then well understood that cauteres is the last of medicine, not according to the foolish man's notion.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider copper as such due to the quality of gold and the superiority of its substance; and they stated that the blades of cauterization do not cause putrefaction but this is not true for I have tested it, and found that it does occur in some men; and surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And also when you heat the instrument of gold, it is not because of the color of gold and cools quickly; and if overheated, put to fire; thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the iron cautery as we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from top to toe, so that finding it is easier.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	c e; theyt that you est la ou lesse m troje l'm: the same as;
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient be purged by solvent medicine, modifying the head iii or iiij times, according to what the virtue and nature and habits of the sick individual can endure; then reset the head of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit with a cross between your hands, and place their hands on some pillows; afterwards put the root of your palm to the root of his neck between his two ears; and wherever come your thumbs, bleed first and then cool the cautery which is called 'olivare', for this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the leu signiet d'encre, and make drawing and stretching your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gently, and look to see if you find bone one small piece; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you can see the bnose as I have told you; after take a bit of sinew, and place soft and moist cotton in there, and put on top, and leave for iii days; afterwards cover with fine wool cloth soaked in butter; and let it be until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, if an open wound persists longer, it drains more; and therefore move to help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must not tire the fire cautery until a part of the bone has been burnt through, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must use the fire cautery until it is thoroughly exhausted, and apply pressure as to flatten the bone as wide as a woolen garment worn by women so that fluids can flow out; and the open wound should be left for long term exposure. Afterwards, it should be cleaned and bandaged.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of fire cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, but rather in some people who have a cause for fear; and I think it best left alone. For the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness with other limbs; and similarly when the head of the patient is naturally frail, and the first appearance of fire cauterization seems more healing to me, then I work such that in this way there is overall health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the pain of a dislocated joint at the base (of the neck)
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain in the entire head comes chronically and lasts for a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the throat, oils, and plasters; but if they undergo cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be mindful if the patient's head is of a severe nature and not too cold; then you may cauterize below the previously mentioned cautery point that we have discussed above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	the m.
dou cautere dou chief	Of fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease extends to the entire area, and the head is purged by dissolving medicines, along with other treatments mentioned earlier for various illnesses, and all this proves unsuccessful: then you must perform cauterization as per two methods, that is with medicinal ague and pitch.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with medicinal ague involves picking a wart of a certain size, and removing the scaly layer and covering it with two small pieces as if placing two eyes; then you place the paste on the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the wart paste under the skin. When it is replaced, ensure that it lies well and leaves it like this for sixteen hours; then remove the bandage and apply the ointment to the wound, leaving the injury as such for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil treatment until it is healed; and if you see any of the burning remedies that I have written or designated to treat burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery should be used in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery of which the form is here.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has .i. projection, and inserted into the painful area with a small opening; and hold your hand and slightly turn the iron so that half of the point you desire to burn is heated; and lift your hand when the artery behind, which is beyond, starts bleeding abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then applying moistened cotton with butter, and treating the wound with ointment until it heals; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellaris," use at its sharp point, and be careful not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not an old one.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating a migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve with medicine or iron, then you must heat the "cultellaris" cautery until it is white; and thus place your hand on the painful wound for half an hour and a day's length, remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not burn the artery nor reach the bone; beware of the jaw which moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerves maintain their focus and spasms do not affect the patient, and guard against excessive bleeding from the artery after it is cauterized, or if there is a fear of reopening and mainly in those who are unfamiliar with this method and have never tried it; leave the vessel halfway open. But I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cautered, and show where it opens as described in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this cautery does not ease the illness and the patient is suffering, caulk it in the middle of the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, provide the cautery we have mentioned or extraction of the artery with the cautery that has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from coldness and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the section, and the pains do not subside, then use this caustic called 'points', of which here is the form: (Continued from another text)
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing on both sides of the ear where the pain is in them, and moving slightly above the root of the ear after locating it correctly, and having six points around each ear; treat the location until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	From the suffering of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be treated by fire is only those that move from moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery on appearances coming from wounds and spittle of blood.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torment that causes swelling from venomous bites and head purging, as well as gargling, then one must cauterize the patient with three burns: one at the root of the ear, another a little forward toward the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part, make an incision in the top of the ear just below the tip, and another of similar length near the temple; leave the cautery until half the skin is charred; this is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the type of incision we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and one must make the knife a bit larger; after treating them as I have mentioned above until they are healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have described before, and there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three burns: two on each of the two ears, one in the middle of the head, and one where they are called "vessels" as we have previously said; afterwards cauterize below the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have described before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, one must give the sick person large years and medicinal pillows for their brain; afterwards, remove all from their head, and place a sinapis oil poultice on their occiput as prescribed in treatments of plasters; here is the manner of cautery: do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus healthy, it's good; and if not, perform three cauteries below the head, descending to the neck, with two inches of space between each cautery; treat as you would others, and if you see anything pressing, make a cautery in the middle; and if work is needed, place two more on either horn [of the bone], and treat until healed; and it will be the kind of cautery called "olive-wood", as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	From coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be rubbed with ointment and as we have previously mentioned; after washing the patient's head, then make a fire cautery on the head and at each horn, and two behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much, and the illness is severe, so do four fire cautions above the spine of the back; leave it until the skin grows thicker, then remove your hand; after curing as long as healed, use the cautery we have previously mentioned called "olivare".
de l’epilempsie	Regarding epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilentic patients should only use a heated blade if they are phlegmatic; it is necessary to first anesthetize the brain and other treatments we have mentioned in the section when the patient suffers greatly and endures great pain from medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot suffer, they should have gargling and chewing to often anesthetize the brain with good meats; after feeding them their fill, perform .i. cauterization according to what we have said before, and .i. cauterizations on the vessels, and each horn; if the patient suffers greatly, they should receive cauterizations as I have described for those with paralysis and softened limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil in the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child who suffers, they should receive a subtle cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moistures and large phlegm, then one should apply the type of cautery we have mentioned to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy are the declining excesses to melancholy, and the body is damp in a sickly manner, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be clarified, according to its condition as seen in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sickly one has been cured; after making .i. tortex well made, like a circle, put it inside the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and be held secure from all sides; then apply the liniment, and anoint with old sheep's butter; and warm it quickly by fire so that the patient can bear to have it placed on them; afterward empty the cup within the head, and allow it to cool down; and do this once a week with another good regimen until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see that you need to cauterize there, do so by applying many points across the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain evenly; and then place cotton wool soaked in butter and lard on it.
de l’awe des eulz	From the root of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the symptoms first appear as I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and guards against all dampness, and makes them sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to return his head, and he performs a fire cautery in the middle of the head, making two fire cauteries on top of the temples where the nerves from the ear are together, or if it is only one; tie off all veins and arteries that are above the crown, so the fire cttery should be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if too much blood flows out, then clamp with a tourniquet as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision how to tie them off; never perform a fire cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	In the body's tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are long-standing and accustomed, and over the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that they are from cold excessive phlegmatic humors, then perform the caustery as I have said at the beginning in the descending section for the eyes: i. a caustery within the head, ii. causteries above both temples, and ii. causteries or haiterels below both bones; and if there is need of more, carefully cauterize along each eyebrow with a small caustery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the body produces tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three doses of a certain drink (possibly a medicinal concoction); afterward perform a caustery or warm oil poultice on the head; and make two cauteries using an 'olive caustery' above each eyebrow, just below the hairline; and be careful not to injure the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the skin of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply this cautery called "olivecauce.
de coi ci est li forme:	 That is why this form occurs:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries above the two sorceries as long as the eyelashes are; and do not remove your hand except when one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	byz:
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	On no occasion does the hair of the eyelids turn into a hedgehog, and prick their eye, for which one performs cauldration in two ways: that is with fire or with burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a clean bed; after shave the eyelids to make them as smooth as silk, and let the beginning of the scar be similar to the veil over the mirror, then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk oil on the eye, then apply the cauldration using this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area several times in small amounts, let the hair be burned at that spot; and the signs of the healing of the wound are when you see the paper retract, and the hairs stand to the height of an olive; then gently touch it with your hand, and leave this for iii. days, then put moistened cotton in oil until the burn is healed; afterwards apply a salve until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs appear and the paper is softened then resume cauterization at that same place as before; and if the hair is falling out, continue cauterizing until the skin heals to its natural state and becomes even, without touching the wool.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization by burning medicine commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle leaves; then take French soap and hot lye, half a measure each, and grind them together well; apply it quickly so that it does not cool down, and spread over the form as you made with myrtle leaves, and put on the paper; and if the illness is in one place only, work for one hour, and the same amount of time; and remove any lice under the hairs; and apply moistened cotton in olive oil; and keep the head of the patient healthy and wrap it with his hands over the medicine, and press a little bit every time when the patient feels irritation from the medicine, as if of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, give the patient the proper medication.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the swelling is gone, raise the limb gently, and look if it rises as though lifted by force of fire or through incision; and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, then reset the limb again if the remedy has not worked well enough, until your treatments are equal; then apply oiled cotton wool to the point of the ends, until the flesh heals over; afterwards, cleanse the joint with oil and another substance, until it is sound.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must guard your work carefully to ensure the remedy does not wear away from the ends.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 If the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick at the oil, resume the treatment on that spot where it has been properly moistened as before; heal until it is sound again; this is the form of the bellows with the mist.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so should be your constraints; and do not return the correct path to those who seek knowledge in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of a fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and if your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to treat with cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	the e la carizner so; after that. de a ben de son'sir cest par; yousilles que.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat both pus and dryness; and if closed, work on the bowels; after placing a hot caustic formatively, hold your hand to the caustic at the non-swollen part above the wound so that your hands do not go mad; and put the caustic in the oil's fatty substance, causing it to rot.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the beginning of the fire cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, resume the fire cautery once more if needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply a cotton pad soaked in butter, and treat with dry ointment until it is healed, then after forty days when the bone is exposed, apply corrosive ague medicine as described in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for aneurysms that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Consider the aneurysm and open it up; then insert a delicate hook in such a manner that its shape is as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the quantity of one pound; and hold your hand firmly or by the armrests, ensuring that the patient does not move at all, so that the plaster adheres properly to its place; and you must put cotton moistened with oil on top: if the plaster is correctly positioned over a fistula, it will heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the aneurysm is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 But if not, then administer a draught of poppy to the nose, and return the aneurysm to its proper place on the body as needed.
des crevaices en levres	Of cracks in the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are bursts of blood vessels called "hairs", especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these bursts as we have described in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the heated iron into those bursts until it reaches boiling point; then cleanse the wound with lard until it is sanitized.
de l’aposteme de la goule	the text them, a the by Tud: Mobere: chilly and there c s.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye socket or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and grown red and become old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it is not effective: then you must take.i cautery according to the quantity of the fume; after making an incision or puncture of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heat goes away from it, and afterwards let go; and do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; and if treated thusly, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the source and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	By slight movement of the teeth.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are weakened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat with medicines and it is not effective: then place the patient's head on his own; after wash off the cauterization of which will come later in such a manner that you put a pinch on the tooth; and put the heat inside the pain at the root of the teeth, and hold your hand until the pain comes away from it feels. After remove the mouth filled with salt water, and stay an hour and rested by;
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And thusly for this manner, the finger which was moving is secured, and the gums softened are held in place, and the corrupted moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the finger
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain in the finger comes from coldness or heat, and medicinal remedies prove useless, then there is need for caustic treatment according to two methods: caustic with butter and caustic with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	; and some and the same. I's.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire cauteries are such that you should grasp a vessel of iron or brass, and it must be large enough for the flame not to reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its shape will come as described later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, because the pain will subside by that day or the following.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the process of that fire cautery, and then remove it quickly; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do a caustic on any eye you wish, and according to what you are able; this is the effect of the blister.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas (scrofula)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the scrofulous swellings are caused by cold and humid fumes, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then apply the fire cautery of which comes afterward this form, and provide two openings for the smoke to escape from the other part of the cautery; and heat the cautery over the abscess once, or as needed until it reaches the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to its quantity, leaving it so for three days; and cover with cotton wool mixed with butter until the sore heals. Then cleanse the area with ointments and bandages until it becomes healthy again.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the caulbone:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When moisture overwhelms the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be first purged with solvent medicines; afterward perform a cautery at the root of the throat, and ensure that you do not come all the way to the throat, nor burn the skin but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward perform another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and be it the cautery called "clavile" that we have described before; and heal the wound as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	When moisture prevails in the ducts of the thyroid gland, especially when originating from cold complexion, then first purging through soluble medicines is needed; afterward make caustic at the root of throat and ensure you do not reach to the throat but just a little. Afterward another caustic neck joint on top of spine as we shown before treat area until it becomes healthy again.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the cold spleen are from moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweat, and it is an early disease, if there are two cauterizations on the sole of each foot; and another cauterization in between the nipples within both breasts; and there is a cauterization called "clavile" according to the form that has been previously stated.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, perform cautery by pricking the entire cautery called "points" that is described before in the illness of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX or near them.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the joint as previously mentioned, let there be three fire cauteries following this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these are lighter cauterizations because you make them in groups of three.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	The translation of "de la dislocation de l’ajutoire" is: From the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first address the dislocation immediately.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soaking the patient on his back and along his sides; then lift the core which is within the muscles of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated therein, apply the caustic that has two iron points with a shape like this.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	the bones is also their en ths are the bon by ça benta the text they have &* (the in;
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it approached near to that nerve for which there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery for burning the hairs with silver wire; afterwards let the patient rest and do not move their limbs for long periods until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it dislocates again, the following occurs rarely; then make a fire cautery above the thick base of the joint, or many small cauterizations.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the dislocation is reset, and it is dampened by bone and cleansed of harmful elements.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When coldness and excessive moisture enter the stomach until it is extracted from its nature, causing many humors within it to multiply, and usual treatments do not help; then it should be soothed on its back, with legs and hands extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After that, make three fire cauldrons from the base of the leg shin with a quantity equivalent to two ells, and at every cauldron's incision, and then place two cauldrons forward on either side as long as the figure of the cauldrons is at an angle of three; and maintain equal space between each so they do not join together when moving towards decay; and let the cauldrons be positioned such that they prick both legs, with the shape of the cauldrons having no proximity.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see a large caudication in the middle of the stomach as per this form; and for those who fear this caudication, perform pinching and sign above the stomach at point one according to the amount that is seen of haemorrhage; then caudicate fully on all parts referred to as "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we have previously had, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the pain from cold and dampness and excessive windiness occurs, until it is restored to its natural condition by superfluities; and the patient's treatment is as we have described in divisions, but they get no benefit. So it must be soothed on their right side; and three cauterizations according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria where the rib cage touches; with space between each cautery equal to two fingers' width; they should be long in shape throughout the body, but not press all of your hand onto a single cautery. The top half of the caustic should only burn slightly, and it should be placed directly beneath their feet; if unable, then lie down and extend legs, and lift arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish to do so, if cauterizing the scurf with a scalpel is desired, and you are skilled in this art, and ensure that you do not burn the entire area, for it would dry out the whole body; and let it not reach to boiling point, as the skin is very delicate there, and wise to observe.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When it is an abscess in the liver that you observe, and whether it is within the flesh of the liver or within its lining: if it's within the flesh, then the patient feels pain but not too severe; and if it's within the lining, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment requires the patient to be supine on their back; and then raise that area or where the abscess is located, and then heat the scalpel similar to a reed.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And for the fire cautery, do so until the root is burned away, and reaches to a sore, until all pus is expelled; afterward according to the treatment of fluxes until it becomes healthy; and only those skilled long in the art of medicine should perform this cautery, by whose hands these diseases have sometimes spread.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it is difficult to work on, and yet I believe he should be allowed to move freely.
dou cautere de pleuresin	n:cI s (uir; ifre t9 paragraph.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said one should perform root cauterizations of astragalus: take the longest root you can find, dry it and make it as thick and long as your fingers; coat with oil and hold in fire for cauterization. Place a large cautery between the eyebrow and neck, two small ones slightly downward on the area above the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, tilted back slightly; one at the pelvis, another near the stomach, and one between the arms, also two along the sides of the hips. Do not squeeze your hand but hold open wide as if smelling something pleasant.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancient ones say that no man should use fire cautery like shaving, and warm it and place it between the ribs until an abscess forms; then pus brings pain as we have said in liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, as a fistula arises which cannot be healed.
de la mice	In the treatment process, there is either sudden fear or instantaneous death of the patient, or an unhealable fistula occurs.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease of madness that we have mentioned in its types, and if there is no benefit, then they resort to three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are two ways to do this: make three or four cauterizations, aligning according to the length of the wound, following the pattern of the caustic for the liver as we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient lie on their back. Another method of cauterization is if you soak the one with two needles, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the flesh that is at the wound site, or where the bony prominences come from the left side, and make elevations when lifting the skin according to its size, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After placing the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then apply the caustic, so it will have four; if you see this, cauterize with all of the caustic on three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After curing when it has become swollen for long periods, this amounts to moving the other as mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Caustic does not apply to epilepsy; rather, it is in the manner called 'asclites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four caustics around the belly, one above the stomaster, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back at the spine, and one place under the udder; and let each caustic be close to where the core feels tender.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cautery is left open to purge long periods of time, and do not abandon the care for the patient after the cautery; healing would accelerate, and together there will be two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the key that we have previously shown; and for the back it should be oval-shaped, as placed here beforehand.
de l’enfleure des piez	To reduce swelling in the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the fingers are swollen in one who is jaundiced, and filled with a yellowish bile, it is necessary to cauterize above the spine between the little finger and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery turning back.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too far in, so it would constrict the yellowish bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the hatchet bone; let the cautery be long, one below the knee front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cautery so it is lengthened to drain the bile; afterwards treat the other sores as we have said.
de la menoison	For leucorrhoea: Apply a poultice of rue sewed up with linen and apply it at night on top of the womb, so that in three or four days it will cure completely by itself. Another way is to grind ruta grass in vinegar wine for ten days; then strain out the liquid and apply it as a douche after boiling it down twice.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines flows out, it cannot be treated by usual methods; thus you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, so perform a large cautery on the stomach as previously described or stomach cautery, where the cautery circulates around; four small cauteries encircle the navel subtly to one central cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistness and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each thumb, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large, for the treatment is effective when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of varicose veins
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When bunions are numerous or deeply rooted, old and filled with cold, moist corrupt humors, treated as we have described in divisions, yet it is not effective, so do the cautery: III on the spine of the back, that which is all behind near the sigmoid colon and slightly triangular; I on the buttocks II degrees. And if you think his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then a large cautery on the stomach as previously described, another on the liver, and another over the spleen with all the cautery incisions; leave the cautery open for long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the joint until it is whole again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the inflammamen called "theelul."
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When treating an athelou, heat the cautery until it appears red-hot, then place it on top of the athelou and let your hand touch where the vein is about to emerge, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there are many atheloi, cauterize each as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they heal; and if you use a large cautery on an alchatim, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	to the oint lesoilethem al the la aul etre de li isntesne mors, and soet l'on dit ou li ongist sonnaultz.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is any fistula, and it becomes aged and rotten with corrupted pus and moisture, you must examine thoroughly the entire tent, and ensure that you know its full extent throughout.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After healing the scorched area that appears raw, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that entered within the tent, and continue the cautery until the affected body part is thoroughly burned once or twice or three times, depending on the amount of sinew needed; and beware not to damage any nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestine, be cautious of these veins, and do not perform further treatment if it is crushed in place, as they are not pearls; after treating the leak until it is healed, and if the vein is slicked with fatty substances for a long time, then know that the vein is entirely healthy again; but if the materials are not oozing, know that the vein is inflamed and has corrupted bone at its foundation; thus as one of these we will say on site.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	the f.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a cautery in the part behind the bladebody, where the hair starts to grow, making some on each side; they should be as long as we discussed previously. Make another cautery towards the back, or however many are needed; and shape them according to the form described before.
de la marris	Of the marrue
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and b.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture flows from the hip flask, and due to this it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lymph nodes are found in the vicinity of the departure, thus one must cauterize the patient on the hip flask with a caustic resembling a circle, and shaping it before the hollow turning as such, that the flask be within the circle; and let the caustics be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these caustics are not present, then make three large olives of caustic and let the caustics be as close to each other as all kernels; and cure until it is dry.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division, with no cure; and the disease is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills or other good appearing pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing the cautery; and the method for cautery is as follows: it consists of both burning remedies together with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery has many methods among them is this one: perform triangular cauterizations on the thigh's pouch using three cauteries in the form of an 'X', ensuring good depth and size, with space between each cautery as wide as a finger, and that the cautery resembles an olive; never do cautery within the middle of the haunch's head for which there are four according to this method:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see it, apply the fire cautery at the circle we have previously mentioned for shoulder dislocations; but do so in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip joint and all its edges are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And it is the method of treating sciatica when pain occurs in the thigh and does not reach as far up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it reaches up to the thigh and leg, make the cautery where the patient indicates pain, with four on the instep above the ankle, slightly towards the left; it should be a flesh wound, and dry it completely; if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three fingers' breadth near the foot or toe, ca
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it worsens, and the pain is from below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire caustic or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not burn either the nerves or the large arteries with them, and cause no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen others who made a cautery on the ankle above the foot, and they continued until the leg was completely swollen, as were the toes too, which became pierced and rotten throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After using the intestinal purging method, it caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the sages say in the fire cautery of the elbow, which is as follows, make it one piece of iron and let it be as large as a newborn's toe or slightly less. It should fit snugly with gaps not exceeding the quantity of a pea; the gaps are over two parts and also even like these, and there should be a well-made metal chain. This is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have them heated until they are all red and glistening with sweat, then place it on the boiling water of the maligned hip, and twist along its lengthy ribs; perform cautery once every time you go around it and leave for three days; then apply an ointment dressing, leaving the open wound exposed for a long period of time until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says we use this little fire cautery due to fear of its nature, and few know who uses it; however, this is a good cautery, which can be endured, and where it applies.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The fire medicinal cautery is such that you make an instrument with gaps in which the edge of the opening descends. It should be made of iron or copper and have a long width, and at the top, it has two eyes. Between each there should be the quantity of the size of a grain; they overlap above and below, and join together as per this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing on the patient's hip area who is lying with their healthy side upwards, and quickly place your hand over the hip box; afterwards pour between the two circles of hot wax that has been heated in the fire for one-third hour, allowing the patient to feel warmth and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it also causes pain like fire; and when the mordication is complete, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip wax, leave for three days; then apply butter until any blackness from scalding has healed; after that, provide this remedy again in case of sores for three days until they are healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use an instrument in a manner similar to what you did with the hip equally; this is the method of hot poulticing, and I have written about it in the treatment for medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take equal amounts of alkaline and quicklime, grind them together, and place in a new vessel.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Where there is a small opening that the point of a razor can enter, place one vessel inside another well-plated vessel, and put alkaline and quicklime and mild hotness on top, as long as you have prepared it to your hand; leave it this way until warmth and moisture seep out or into the plated pot. Then take all that hotness, pour it over chalks and over alkaline just as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And so it will be very painful and managed with the bread of medical treatments and other member cauteries because it performs one work as fevers, and also other medicines that should be well-cauterized on the heel similar to theriac, miel anacardi, and chalz with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galien tells us of a treatment in which an honored man was healed from the pain of the heel and sciatic nerve, and his limb greatly improved, saying that no other cure was applied to it, and that he recovered once again when this treatment was done, and subsequently he bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And it is said thus to procure the litargire grass and fresh but dry, grind it quite finely with a small amount of fat, and apply on the heel and thigh and leg where the pain persists, and leave it; let it remain for three hours according to the quantity that does not make the patient feel burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter a bath so that the body is somewhat stimulated, and let it lie down, and the pain will leave entirely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery for such remedies unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair fat, it greatly helps; and the cautery must be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take a linen cloth and moisten it with old oil, then place it in the space between the thumb and next finger which is called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry goat's hair fat, hold it in flame until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the linen and let it be until they turn red; repeat this process as long as you believe by sense that it reaches up to the elbow, and the pain ceases. This manner of cautery is called 'cautery of goat's hair'.
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain in one's back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive blood loss, or resembling spread cold matter, none of these similarities warrant fire cautery unless it originates from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been relieved of foul pills or similar substances, place him on his back where he feels the most pain; make three lines marked with ink, and in each line, create five or more cauterizations depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; the cauterizations should be made according to the "point" method of cauterization. And if you do this, make three or four at the middle wrist like so:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes in young children, and the sign at the beginning is that their backbones are narrow when they grow, causing fear; you will find this appearance on the last vertebra of the spine and above it.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and recognize it as a growth, then you shall cauterize with the loop of this type of caustic:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the caulteries are performed, each part of the spine is balanced.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, using cautery around the spine with a pointed tool making two or three lines, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After treating the wound until it is clean as we have said, and be careful not to perform cautery in sensitive areas where a nerve may be harmed.
de la dolor des jointes	Pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which those called "podagra" properly do so, and when it is caused by coldness and treatments with medicines cannot heal it, then they are treated with cauterization in this manner: make a wax cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if there is a need to grasp above the wound on the foot, then make cautery completely as one calls it "without point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come to the joints and other areas, which happens often, then make cautery on each knee three or four times for each part, all olive-colored; and if you need more, do so, but do not hold your hand with force until the desired color is achieved.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery as we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines; and if there is no pain in the elbow, make points on each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the sides or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care for the patient and prescribe appropriate medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be restored to health with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	From a ruptured sack
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When ulcers come in the arms and swell at their hinges anew, it is necessary when you see them open to not close them that day; use things that relieve the belly so waste descends from the stomach; afterwards let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to rub alcohol over his veins until they are healed, and reset the joints in both arms, and press down hard beneath the ulcer above the bone of the elbow, and at a sign that resembles three-fourths of a circle on top of the body; then apply the fire cautery as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and produces sweat.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then moisten the bullets at their place; and minister with a bandage that they do not return backwards; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and put one cushion and two sergeants under the thighs, and another under the feet which tie his hands; then apply the cautery across all your hand, and straight and at length until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it on the first try, repeat again another time as needed until you come to the cuisinage. Be subtle that the swelling does not occur when making the cautery; do not burn it; and by this care the patient will not die or suffer other maladies.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach to the bone with fire cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is proper that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and large people also proportionate; after three days heal them with butter at the caustic until the burn has scabbed over; then use other ointments until they are healthy, and apply them to the patient's back for forty days until the wound is well-healed; and it must be ensured that their bandages remain intact long enough so that when they rise from bed, the swelling does not occur.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, dress him with a well-made bandage, and keep it for another forty days; have good rest, that he work little and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too much; and once this lesson is learned, then he will be completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will now describe afterward the treatment of tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal surgery
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When other diseases come into different bellies and become known, and you see that they no longer grow, then the patient must undergo treatment by fire according to its quantity, and be burned on one third of their length; afterward treated as we have said; and none of the ancients have stated that it should be cauterized with a fire at three angles in this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first sign the edge of the coin and make a line for its width above the ulceration, and another below it, and hold your hand in all the cauterization firmly.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and more fluid.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of long-standing pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain occurs in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then one should be treated with caustic treatment using a cauterizing instrument called "points," and the caustics should be applied according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and degree of pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is near the first caustic, that's good; if not nearby, start with another caustic upon that one, as custom dictates that it should move to the limb closest to it, so you must apply the caustics until the patient recovers.
de meselerie	Of physicians' workmanship
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illness is sometimes relieved by caustic treatment with great help, especially diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see it with fire? Be careful if the disease is at its beginning, and if it's treated as we have said in the division, without receding or lasting, and you doubt that corruption may infect everything bad; then on the first cauterization over the head: one near the nose upwards, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the horns, and one behind the temple; allowing your hand so that the fire reaches almost to the bone, until scabs emerge through which vapors from large humors can escape; then cauterize according to what appears beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is widespread and clearly manifests itself, then you should apply caustic applications as we previously mentioned: on the forehead chiefly, with one at the root of hairs, and another near the eyes; two each along the spine of the neck, five down the back spine, a large one above the buttocks and another close by; two each between shoulder blades, two over hip bones, two over knee tendons, and one on each joint of hands and feet, as well as in the palms' hollows; and be mindful not to burn near any nerves that are behind pressing against it. On no occasion apply caustic to the bone of the thumb or a large one at the stomach bone, nor another over the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you perform cauterization, the more help it provides, and benefits the patient; and know that the sickly do not feel pain from cauterization as healthy ones do, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it must be that the cauterization should be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in handling iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing, let them lie on a bed of flour with honey and other remedebut until it heals.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it does not heal, then you must perform cauterization on the limb according to its size; make the cauterization a bit into the skin's redness; then treat with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At no time is cauterization done to the hand and foot and back, where a nerve causes limb movement to cease; thus bone swelling occurs; and in any case it does not involve anyone unless they are familiar with the body's members and nerve pathways.
de albaras	Of fractures
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "fractures" is old and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterize with a small cautery proportionate to the amount of flesh affected until it turns pale, and its color changes; then treat with flour paste and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with blood from a pigeon's colon and a heron's neck, equal parts each; then melt them all together, bind with a cloth, and apply in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization involves using heat to destroy the infected tissue and stop the progression of the disease. It's important to note that such a procedure would be highly dangerous and ineffective, as modern medicine has far better treatments for syphilis through antibiotics like penicillin. However, during medieval times when this text was written, cauterization might have been one of the few available options for treating various illnesses due to a lack of medical knowledge and technology.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a cancer begins to appear, if you can stop it, cauterize the wound with a cautery that forms a circle around the entire tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 However, they say that cauterization is also done at the center of the tumor; however, I do not believe it to be beneficial, for I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it used before; moreover, a more effective approach would be to perform cauterization around it using a circular cautery, as we have mentioned in many cases of cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it is slow to kill or due to the excess caused by it, or because of the weak state when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to its pressure; if you see that he will die soon: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons while pinching; afterwards leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because she is going to be on the verge of dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout with cauterization, heat the cautery from which this form comes.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And insert your hand into the midst of that disease called "adubabelati" until you feel its head with cauldrons, and make them such that the patient feels it behind in a certain manner so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until he is perfectly healthy again.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire using iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way of illness there is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a mixture in the limbs, as they eat at the limbs like dry wood does to flames.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this illness present that could suffer from caustic fire alone, then carefully apply small and large cauterization as it suits the location or nature of the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all corruption, leaving nothing remaining, so that everything that is corrupted be osteotomized.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil until the fire-burns are healed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment with ointments producing heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days the healing does not occur, it is good; and if not, resume the fire treatment on that which remains unclean from corruption.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this mixture has never been treated with fever-reducing medicine in place of fire treatment; but nonethebo is of greater help, and I have already explained the treatment for fever medicine in the section: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of those who come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Many times it happens that with the feet there is an illness coming forward, called "closed" in our mind, and is a large thing requiring treatment to strengthen the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatments for this illness are of two kinds.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know fire cautery, and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 It is to know fire cautery, and water hot cautery. This consists in heating a nail as if it were the end of a quill pen, made from good iron so that it can be driven through all parts, with delicate margins; after making it hot on the nail, turn your hand around it until the nail becomes white-hot; leave thus for three days till pus formation begins. Then make an incrustation of well-chewed waxes with oil, and let the incrustation remain overnight, then the nail will draw out and be rooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the joint with healing salve until it is sound again.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if they are turned inward towards the body, and it happens many times to hands and feet, then you must apply cauterization with hot water; and here is one method: take a needle of brass or iron, or a sponge on a stick, place it over the wart, and ensure it touches all around. Then put some warm water on it, hold your hand steady, and press while turning so that the edge of the needle reaches to the root of the wart, allowing the hot water to deeply penetrate up to the root; let the patient endure a bit of burning from the hot water for an hour. Then leave it as is, and it will detach completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus do one after another, until you relieve all that are on the body, then heal with ointments imbued with herbs.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shakes from coldness of nerves or fever quartan (fourth-day fever) or any other, it is appropriate that you make them .iiij. (4) cauterizations or .iv. (4) along the spine at the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one on a gland or nipple, and one above the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will cease their trembling, and restore their health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	For purulent pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 At no time do they become visible further down the body as baths or pus-filled boils that come from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it becomes necessary when they appear to perform a caution on each head of the boil: a subtle caution made from wood of myrtle, with points heated by fire, or from a long root of aristolochia, or with a lenticular caution.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And never caution on at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow more in front of them, but is disrupted the excesses from which it comes, and are healthy; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the vein is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great blood flow issues from an artery cut at the wound near the perineum, or in the incision of an abscess, or during cauterization on a limb, and similar things; it is very bad to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if it happens to anyone, be quick to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very tight until blood flow is calmed from under your finger; then apply small or large olive oil cauterizations as needed so they are all red; then take .i., or a big one or a small one according to the wound and where it is located, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery until blood flow ceases.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts when you lift your arm over the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another one that is heated in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after the other until the wound is sealed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and prevent any further harm coming upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be properly closed just by itself if the artery is large, unless it is through one of the four ways we have mentioned: with cautery, or with extraction if it has not been treated yet, or with strong thread binding, or with medicines applied that can seal blood.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will provide the tight bandaging with cloths or applying burning substances on it, or other similar things, if not in vain.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in anyone who does not have a mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it until blood returns above the wound and vein; do not move it, but often moisten with cold water so that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops flowing; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of incision treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization, or burning medicines, and ointments; causes; promoters; forms of cauterizations; I have placed this chapter up to a foot, and I will go through this chapter by the same method so that it is easier to find what you seek.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this section, it is necessary, dear student, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of fire cautery treatments, and therefore greater care is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In this chapter's procedures, there is often blood evacuation when opening veins, incising abscesses, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar matters; where doubt and fear arise, leading to death for some individuals.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I advise you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 If they come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they easily die due to exhaustion or the severity of their condition, and one should have fear for these cases.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among them are those who lose their wits and claim: "Wait, I am guardians," while the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not proper for you to consent to those who come to you in this manner, but rather place greater trust in your honor than in your covetousness and do not act foolishly without certainty or evidence; use prognosis and indication wisely in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored. This will aid you in acheinb good reputation, glory, and memory for generations to come.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son of mine, our Lords grant you good understanding and uprightness; and if you wish to seek the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise in speaking by sections, as per the section on cauterizations that I have described from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water, headaches
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	One must believe that this disease often occurs in children during birth, and when the labor is too strong, straining the child's head; it sometimes happens without any known cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and all that I've observed die quickly; therefore, it seems to me that the chapter is better suited for treatments of wounds.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	cece ones t; the ou ca and its so. I cas mude in their en a c
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greatly increased, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are swelling at each part's joint tops, and it still does not recede when pressed with your hand inside, then one must make three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, remove all the pus thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After straining wound dressings and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then untie it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing for even swelling relief, and have the patient eat dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess and the assembly of water are, for neither always in front nor behind, nor always to the right, nor always to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess head is and the accumulation of water, and do as you can with it; but be careful not to cut an artery; watch for blood flowing freely, so that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of fluids.
de reume	To restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there occurs in anyone a disease called "catarra" affecting either the eyes or the genitals, and the illness is longstanding, and medicinal treatment proves ineffective, then the final remedy is to use cautery by sealing off those two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you see the wound healed, the patient should retract their head; then rub it with an abrasive cloth until arteries are visible, then stretch out the neck fully; then check if they breathe deeply and clearly, and a little of each ear is covered afterward. Then close the ears with stitches, then cover both sides with a strip of fine gauze enough to reach almost to the bone, until swelling subsides at the base of their jaw.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, place the strips under the artery and seal above, cutting as two fingers across its width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, continuously pour out the blood.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the arrow does not open to touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space for three fingers, then bind and push until the bone; and what must be put in place by the blood is six ounces, and possibly a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without painful pressure, if an abscess does not form there, then strain the wound and close it, and apply ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	so they dole que les beniz; s qu’m l’s; Et: LVoir ce bon magine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When a young migraine occurs and severe catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headache and similar things arise, it is treated by methods of medical care and all this does not help them; we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes his temple hairs stand on end, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well by its pulsation, but it heals very slowly like in some men who are excessively cold; and if it heals, the patient strains off any cloth from their neck, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and applies hot water until the artery manifestly appears again; then take the spatula of which this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly score the skin as you reach the artery, then bind it above with strips of cloth removed from each part; and if the artery is fine, threading a needle at its tip, then stitch that area according to the quantity of two fingers' widths.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not sewn up properly, then all will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the bleeding of wounds for .vj. days until .iij.; and if the sinew is large, it should be tied in two strong layers of sturdy silk thread so that decay does not occur at the seam of the wound, and blood flow returns; then remove any excess between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a surgical caustic up to the bone as long as the head is cut off; this is the healing work, provided the sickly does not have fever and they are of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For caustic treatment is helpful to finish ulcers; this is why it's more useful for ulcers.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When extracting arrows, fill the cavity with plenty of soft cotton and cover it well; and when you remove them, be cauterized with dry medicines that produce charcoal, and bandages, until they are healed; and if there is an artery, do as you work on it with a cautery, or fill the cavity with vitriol and strain it with your hand to make the wound close; and if no salve is present, place your gauze there until it hardens, and pour cold water on it until it freezes, and remove as much as necessary; and more easily in artery removal of cauterize the vein by this cauterizer sharp with .ij parts, but the sharper to keep them longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When excessive farting occurs, it retains less warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a wide space, and then when you have tied up both ends, heat the iron until hot enough to reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be pulled apart at the eyes because this is not the proper way for this cauterization in all cases; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	he.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes flow into veins near the forehead's skull base, and medicine provides no relief when applied there, you see the patient's face reddening and feeling as if of tremors; and it is oily and moist enough that the hair on the eyebrows stick out, becoming hot from tear heat, requiring this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 It is called the "old cure for bruises," and you should do this to the patient with this condition - hair on their forehead; then make three cuts or incisions of equal length along the forehead, one from ear to ear across the forehead down to the bridge of the nose. The other two are made at a width equivalent to two fingers above the eyebrows. Be cautious not to incise the arteries that lie underne. Avoid cutting into the continuation of the two lower jawbones, and make each wound three finger lengths across. Prepare a piece of sponge cloth for applying pressure to stop bleeding, then use it with gauze rags to cleanse the blood away; finally, apply the healing ointment made from these ingredients:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that extends from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all flesh that is between the two openings, up to the entire sac which is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle of the second incision to the other end, and then remove this spatulary.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the instrument called "culletail" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side, yet soft on the other side and not cutting, this is its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the screws toward the flat head, and the ribs facing the bone, and tighten until they reach the middle notch.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And bind all vessels branching from the head as much as the incision continues to where it opens into the flat head, and then further still to the other edge; and then extract the blood equally, express the wound for collecting the blood taken; then place a tent of fine cotton in each fissure, and cover with cloths soaked in vinegar and oil and herbs, ensuring that sores do not form there; and on the third day loosen the ligament, and apply abundant plantain water dressing, then treat with basilicoid ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other remedies used for healing wounds until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	Doubly remedy by rejoining them again
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When they come from hardened catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, impairing vision, with burning pus; and hair falls out, and chiefly at the forehead there is great pain, and malaise causes sneezing; thus by these incidents, one knows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single vein, but rather they cure where it is, as this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is that you command the patient to return his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another with wide holes.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make incisions up to the bone; and remove your hand near the nerves of the temples when they move during eating; and when the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, then wrap between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool, and attempt lint-wrapping; then cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and protect from heat burns; when it is set, you must rub the bone until new growth begins, then treat with things that promote healing, which are made into ointment.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts wax, and make an ointment; apply it to these wounds for healing completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From plugging of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, stones from minerals or similar substances; seeds such as beans, peas, and lentils; or fluids flowing like water easily and similarly formed substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it passes into the ear as a stone or any other thing not near to the ear, nor growing in the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, then let some violet oil or sage ointment trickle out, and perform an extraction; and if it is a condition to cause sneezing, blow through the nostrils when sneezing comes, and place cloths or wool near the ear; and raise the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Many times it arises from this treatment; and if it does not arise, let an extraction be performed with fine forceps, of which the shape is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps up at the pinchers, that's good; if not, arrange for delicate extraction of a small double layer; and if it does not come out this way, make an eel bait with a headpiece or aperture in the ear canal, and plug what is around the channel with soft wax so that the ends cannot enter with the pliers; then properly treat it, as often comes up just as we have said; and if it does not come up in this manner, grasp where it enters, and place some instrument at a point to do so, and put a bit of cotton around; then press gently on the wart or whatever it may be, and remove with pliers.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not jump up after all these methods we have mentioned, quickly make an incision in the ear where pus is likely to come out and cause swelling; then the method of cutting is such that you first cleanse the patient's head, and draw a small amount of blood according to its strength, then seat the patient between your hands with their head tilted upwards, and make a tiny incision at the base of the ear near fat or whatever it depends; and let the cut be as round as a crescent until you reach the pus, then drain it as much as possible according to your ability, and suck out hastily into your mouth; cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are bourses curez as the mal a lesquals it is not to be ablet de paroleis de semblanz que tu laie estant en ce li leu; et si qu’il iraignee seum espiens, et iri eulc.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have tried many times; then delicately extract it with tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction may be successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore, when it enters the ear, the patient should first induce sneezing with a powdered conditioner, and stuff the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it comes out this way, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not, take many small and light sticks according to the length of your thumb and gently heat them; then put one or two in the patient's ear, remove them on the other side with another stick, and place a third stick under the stone that is in the ear; continue placing pebbles one after the other until all the water has exited completely, so they will come out easily. If you see this happening, take a bamboo stem, put it into the ear on one side while heating the other end over fire until it chars slightly; then remove that stem and replace it with another one until all the water is expelled as we have described for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the stone, if it is of small size, like a flea and suchlike thing, treat it as we have said in the section on division; but if it is of larger size that can be felt, prepare for extraction with pincers; and it's easier to remove those things that are in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not help, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight; if there are no worms, use fine forceps, and if they do not appear, take the cone-shaped instrument that lies within.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And one must pull down below and widen above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And insert the sharper tip in the ear according to the amount of suffering experienced by the patient, then gently push it forward throughout the canal; do this often until all signs have gone.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out as instructed, pierce around the canal with cotton as I have described for stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in worm extractions, and you will find or treat them with distillations; and pour your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which forms it as such:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It should be made of silver or brass with small holes at the bottom and openings for distillation; and to press the distillation through a well-made copper instrument so that you can do it, then take some absorbent wool and wrap it around the tip quickly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the cone, and place as much of your medicines in the cone, and keep them in the ear; then put all the cotton through the wick, and press firmly until the oil is distilled or steamed from the ear; and feel it relieves the pain within, and the distillations are heated so on fire.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From plugging of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any protrusion in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by plugging of wounds or objects inserted within the ear, and such blockages occur at times completely inside the ear so that one cannot see it; sometimes there is no discharge from the opening, and the sight remains clear.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if one cannot see it coming from inside, it is of serious healing in various dispositions, and where one can see, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look within: if you see an obvious swelling on this spot of skin with its shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	the fact by  (and: a certainlys; they do so that d; this after their. Is n's
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the inflammation is present in the ear, take a very fine and gentle razor blade and heat it slightly over fire, then insert it into the outer part of the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the obstruction of which the patient feels great pain upon hearing, pierce lightly, and ensure that you do not compress the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a pad according to the size of the opening, and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do nothing for a day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and grease it with rosewater, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see swelling of the ear, make sure to change the tent and move another moistened tent made from rosemary oil and wax until the inflammation has subsided; then heal as long as it remains healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and wrap it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove blood loss which are based on distillation techniques.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes in papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and pliers, and tie the stem of a catheter at its roots; then put the powdered mercury on their place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not come off, so the subtil lenticular cautery burn, and after incision heal well; and often they are repeated, as nothing remains on their roots; and when they are burnt by fire, those roots dry out and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the grease
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times come in letters things that appear clotted in their shape and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called 'hailstorm,' consisting of excessive moisture above and below the paper; treatments are as follows: take care if hailstorm clears on one side or another, which is a light matter to know; then make it wide again, then gently scrape each part, then use tweezebrushes, and remove.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot grasp it without piercing the paper slightly, nothing will harm the patient; and if the fracture is large, stitch it together until healed; and if small, do not apply pressure, for the herbs will soon restore and strengthen him.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if drizzle descends into the depths of the ear toward the upper part, invert the parchment, and gather drizzle with forceps, cut and press from both sides; and if the parchment is pulled away by incision, it harms nothing; and when drizzle is cured, pour oil of salt water into it and heal the place that brings comfort until the patient is sound.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Eczema is an ointment that appears in the form of rashes on paper and linens, occurring more often in children than others; it causes great discomfort to their eyes, and they develop inflammation upon waking, unable to look at sunlight due to fast-running tears; thus, they lie close by covering their faces with damp napkins and sleep, while the appearance of eczema is concealed under the ointment.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you apply pressure to the joint with your hands and feel the extension between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of treatment is that the patient places their head on a towel; then they take a linen cloth and make it into a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, placing it over them; press with both hands apart so that the exinamch gathers within the circle; then make an incision in the sharp spatula wide enough as the wound made on vein's skin; and cut until you reach the exinach. In various positions comes exinach from the incision, depending on the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the entire piece of ragged cloth between your two fingers towards the end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and ensure you do not push near the tear, that you do not come with all the torn tissue up to the hair, that you do not pull.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the nail does not protrude at the beginning of the tear, slightly lift the tear as it appears; then remove it as we have said, moisten with rags and water, and place on the wound, and bandage securely.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such men crush grain and place it there to spoil that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment is carried out until they are healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes to an abscess hot, then apply a cure of plasters soothing until they are healed.
des poilz des papieres	From the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs from paper sprout that are not natural and become aged, they harm the eyes, leading to familiar types of diseases such as tearings and softening of the papers and pus, until it causes destruction; and the treatment is according to four methods: by cauterization with fire alone, or by medicinal ague in accordance with what precedes or chapter on cauterization, and done either through incision and suturing or through plugs, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your right hand; then turn the paper with its hair side towards your left; if it turns, that's good; if not, pierce with a needle through every thread across; and be either by the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw one thread across all the paper, turning to the edge; then make an incision in the area below the paper, away from the misplaced hairs, up to the entire width of the forehead; then extract a thread, and place a small tent made of cotton wool and gauze underneaturess the paper, then press against the paper with a figure resembling an enche (a funnel), as in the bellows of myrtle, but it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity you see elevating the paper that is pinned together.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is need for you to apply a large quantity of paper according to how the paper has been softened; then cover all the surface up to the two lines that you have drawn and begin from the great margin downwards until reaching small, so it forms fissures close to natural hair roots in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two angles with a hook, then scrape off everything; then sew together both edges using an embroidery stitch of a single thread, and drain the blood, and trim any excess threads above the eyebrows to various sticky substances if you wish to do so; but if not, have no concern over it, leave the suture and filaments until the third or fourth day; then treat the wound without stitching using drying and tightening remedies because the paper relies on the healing of the wound and coming together of its edges (as say the elders), but the sutures are loose, and this is a worry-free procedure; and another method: and it is that you form the paper into a shape like a marten's fur as we have described before, with three needle holes according to the following figure:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take the shape resemble this way on which you use then are pierced so forthwith these cire afore that the of it is shaped according to quiset, pour.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 If you cannot hold the tongs, and things are not equal, take a needle or thread of any kind, and insert it into the figure; then insert another thread near the large ear, and the second thread near the small one, and join between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured, as we have explained, then stitch together both sides of the wound by sewing, and care until it is healed; if an abscess arises from your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointment-softening balm; and sometimes it happens that hair growth on the paper is converted: in this case, you must use what we have said about making the incision; but sewing on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of abscesses is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and fold them inward according to what I have said, and then make two cuts by skillful art, and two fine ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and tie both heads with both threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what is underneanno
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it lingers and the wound is under some force, then treat until it heals completely; and if the wound is swollen, and its edges raised, with no hair growth there; and you shall make two cords as per this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a fine needle and thread some delicate silk filament, then join the edges and carefully stitch both together; making the lengths of the threads one palm long; then arrange in sequence another thin silk filament briefly, and stitch along the first thread; then place the patient's head on your lap so that under sunlight the operation can be seen clearly because it is a subtle and fine procedure, then push the needle through all the length at the root of the hair pushed against it, pierce the paper hastily as you pull over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the filament, and insert that hair into the filament if there are one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until the threads lie flat on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the filament is treated and the hairs don't come forth with it, you will retrace the filament from underneath all of the thread that you have arranged, until the filament comes forth clearly to your sight; then you shall trace both the filament and the thread, and let the oil be left loose for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and grows a tuft on top; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with that which is left as it was grown, till it lengthens and then loosened.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the corruption of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the eye, if there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it occurs from a sudden injury, or surgery, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the manner of treatment is to split that suture, and separate its edges, and place lin threads inside it, and leave them until healed; and in this treatment do not use anything that dries and constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but work with softening things like fenugreek; and rose water or distilled water mixed with linseed oil, and anointments of dyewood resin melted in any kind of oils, wrap it around a tent, and cure that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not change entirely from its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are only directions for this illness so that it does not return in the same way as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the wound caused by an arrow hitting fat or oil-rich flesh, where swelling is more likely to occur.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called 'asachra', is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and cuts and caustic treatments and similar things; the method of treatment involves taking an arrowhead with double threads, placing it in the shaft, piercing through to the left corner so that both threads come out on the right side; then align the shaft above all the feathers.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the contour of the paper returns as it should be restored, that is good; if not, take scissors and place them in the tear, turn the paper, creating two tears or slits within the paper; let the head of both tears be at the two angles of the incision you made, so when they are joined together, the contour is like that of a letter with no "I" but an ampersand ("&"); then remove that part, according to the amount its edges are swollen from or free of, as this determines how to mend the paper; then join the two separated parts with silk thread; then treat it as we have mentioned with softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a fracture or incision or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clean cut below the hairline of the paper, and according to what has been said above; then treat between the two sides of a tent as I have mentioned; the treatment must be done according to the form of the disease, for its shape is very diverse, and skilled masters adapt devices in all ways that can return the figure to its natural form; similarly with the sickly people, based on what needs treatment and medications in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The matter of this skin as it should be treated and administered according to needles for different treatments and a variety.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs in such a way that the paper above is soldered with white lead, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a rasor beneath the paper, lifting it up; and you extend it using tweezeburners, until you scrape off what's attached to the delicate spatulum, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too sharp so that the patient cannot endure if the spatulum becomes too soft or blunts the oil. Make your incision carefully, scraping away the adhered assembly as lightly as possible so that the paper regains its natural shape; and cleanse all of that assembled area without using dirty water, instead use fresh water with collier, then insert a linen pad between the paper and oil, placing soft woolen cloth in abundance above. After three days of washing it daily with pure collier until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the claw of the oil (referring to removing impurities or excess matter from ointments)
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	When the untient li on li eulz est le ointments qui sont les poignet ele oin a cuide pire, si s cuite, quant ils est cuidre que uis une pliau seigne la pere et nonse as toutes l’est.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of incision is such that the patient places their head in your hands, then work the eyelids; remove paper from your hand, then clamp with the nail clipper for double folding, and extend above. Then take a needle, put a hair from a horse, or goat, or cow, and a strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert into the eyelash, pierce through the entire needle, tie one end with the thread and stretch upwards, scrape all the hair along the edge of the eyelash that tightens around the pore until it meets the skin, then trim any remaining root on the rim delicately and gently, so that after the incision, the body does not produce tears as usual; never ever extend only the eyelash with the thread, but also the filament, as we have said. Then scrape away all the softness of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure that the incision does not touch or tear the skin and that the pore is not pierced; after the incunction, pour some sealed oil mixed with litargire into it, and leave until the next day; then treat as necessary until healing occurs.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And li chauz, puis the a ungle, and s. The following instructions, as nargite; et la ou lesse tu le pence. Then doet l’arest parfait li de rouges ane se vient est d argie te oint heal of the une gile, then c et pointe itt ce que unguinisle, si esoil; then, and les m jus le ting, ou. And replete eue la hooit li piet l’ocel, for un peu:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail with subtlety, and if you see that it does not diminish and has spread therein, squeeze from your mouth into the oil collyrium made of litargire and red cordial syrup, and stuff the oil until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then let it break and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is fully healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh by the ear is greatly hindered in the oil with great harm, suspend it at a time, and cover part but not all, to avoid blood flowing from the eyes; then squeeze into the red collyrium made of litargiren.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the arrow shot above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Some men are afflicted by the red plague at times, covering the lesion and binding with papers, twisted around a staff; its appearance resembles a balsamic rose; in such cases, it's advised that patients place their heads in the sun, then work on the affected areas as needed, treating all joints suitable for this method with great force; afterwards remove the first layer, shaving down to the end carefully, ensnaring the area without disturbing the surrounding tissue during treatment; and make an incision using a spatula-like tool similar to what is used in nail trimming or removal of small growths as demonstrated after this chapter's teachings. Once the incision is complete and all material removed, apply soothing oil by rubbing it on or dripping red cologne onto it along with corrosive remedies; then secure cotton over the area to ensure no excess moisture remains. If nothing persists, a scab will form, and if you suspect a hot abscess, leave the oil to treat the inflamed sore, subsequently returning to your practice until healed.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary for you to heal the weakness of each oil from natural causes and those from accidental causes in surgical work; and do not put your hand into any of these surgeries until you see that this limb has been affected by the procedure.
des voines des eulz	From veins, through the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red are bruises that form under the skin, and they impair sight and weaken the eye constantly.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, when you first examine the eye in which swelling is present and nothing else, then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to raise their head and then gently compress those bruises along the edge according to your knowledge, and let the compression be subtle but firm following this method.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two cones made by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then make those vessels weak subtly, and let the blood flow hour by hour until you see that these vessels are removed from the body; and ensure that you do not bleed at the tips of the stumps, and perform this procedure in the midday hour before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that only those weakened vessels remain; and when you have done this, distil into the neck vein yellow and red to corrupt what is lodged inside the belly.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot extract all of that within the hour, apply an ointment on the vein with things soothing to ease the pain and let it rest for a few days until the pain is relieved and certainty of heat subsides, then resume in this manner as long as it remains healthy; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of a fistula of oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	They call "arissati" fistulas: when you treat it with cauterization and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then in it there is a trick whereby one cuts into the abscess above which it must die, draining all moisture that is present until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	, and desu is ire it the s, ce que est arse of this medicine lium, then to treat, tu cture the m nus in a pest onct. But that you have soe de lesme; quid ustissolet, et le matrimes est ointron lissu d ses li duces de la, but.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a bit until you know that corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore its position with medicinal dressings.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the urine is thick and difficult to pass, and the bowel movements are firm remaining so for 40 days, with no renewal or abscesses occurring, meaning nothing else has happened, then there is no other remedy than to reset the fistula at the base of the nose using this method: uncover the bone a second time by iron and medicinal leaches, and when it's revealed take an instrument according to this form, ensuring the iron tool has three angles, and the shaft is narrowed up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away from the oil bowl, then turn everything back until it pierces the bone and causes pain to the patient as if they press their hand against their neck; and once in position, restore the dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the pus comes out and hardens the eyes, let the matter go towards the neck; this is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From dislocation of the joint
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is fractured all over and there is no displacement or thinning of the nerves, it should be treated; first you bandage the patient, then apply cups to suck blood without causing harm, using leeches if needed, then treat with a poultice made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla. Then strain the joint, use linen bandages soaked in wine, doubling each one into four layers based on how much is needed; then apply them consecutively. Repeat bloodletting without causing harm with cups, remove the poultice and leave the joint strained day and night until the ligaments soften significantly; then remove the strain completely. Remove the poultice after a day and a night, if you see the bone healing, it's good; if not, reapply linen bandages, poultices, and cups to suck blood until sane again.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	There seems to be an error in your last input as "de l’issue de la vusine" doesn't make sense. However, if you meant "d’une issue du drapage", it would mean 'from the bandaging'. Could you please clarify or correct my mistake? Here is a translation of the text:
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When dislocation occurs in a joint that has been opened and appears to be filled with small particles like grains of resin, which is visible; then you should examine the area closely, as procedures involve inserting a needle at the root of the affected part up to a certain depth, followed by inserting another needle or using a doubled thread from the edge downwards; and puncture it, leaving the first needle according to its position. Then cover the place with the two-threaded piece and tie one end around the vein, securing it tightly; then remove the needle and apply a moistened bandage abundantly over it; leave it until the thread detaches from the vein, then treat the area with soothing remedies until the wound is healed; never should the wound be constricted by the vein at any part of a circle made of cloth, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye takes on a significant appearance, then carefully puncture with a fine needle that enters from near the edge of the oil (vein), and draw out clear moisture and lower the eyelids, causing them to open; then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	For if they are not completely healed.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not mere water that flows from the eye, resembling clear running water; and its appearance in surgery is such that you seat the patient on a chair prepared and upright, then take their head between your hands with both sides, and let them move until you see the bow coming above your eyes; then fix it firmly, do not remove or unravel the bandage, and watch how the patient reacts as usual; if they do not open their eye, know that it is water, and if the placement of the bowel has not been prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient is to be seated between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and gently press on the cornified skin near the bone; as long as it has not moved, continue with the continuity of the conjunctive along the horny tissue and crown, until it moves. And once it is moved, let them drip into the clear hot water mixed with honey or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be treated again with another treatment until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of waters from the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the appearances of waters in their separation, and what is required for cutting; if done according to health principles.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands in sunlight and firmly hold his oil well; then place the paper of the oil to your left hand if its edge is facing left or to your right hand if its edge is facing right; then take in your right hand, if the edge is facing left, the instrument called "almagda," or with your left hand if it's facing right; then position the tip of the instrument near the crown by gently inserting a thin rod into that part of the oil at the lower outer rim, and insert the almagamut tool carefully, turning your hand until it pierces through to the other side of the paper, feeling as though almagda comes empty from the item; and the measure for the almagada's path must be equal to the full width of the space that is between the plumule up to its end. It will show the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the cornified tissue, so put the instrument as close or where the water is and then press gently after another direction.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If they now flow out, see the patient before you with the instrument in its place.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting for a while, and if the liquid rises through another pathway, place the rod with the instrument, and once it is firmly inserted and does not rise further, gently extract using slight twists of your hand; then pour a little bit more resin on it, and remove any impurities inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place the plug or greasy linen soaked in oil and plenty of eggs, and bind it with a clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, along with those from our time, place the common poultice with an abundance of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if mercury cannot enter the bone due to its hardness, as there are individuals with excessively hard bones, it is necessary to use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And so, you must puncture the conjunctiva only slightly but not too deeply, but rather gently, then pour in resin as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare a comfortable resting place for the patient with darkness on their back; they should be free from all movements, consume easy foods, do not move his head nor left nor right, bind according to its natural position until tomorrow; then remove in that same dark room, examine their eyes, and let them see various things before reapplying the ligature until the seventh day; it is necessary for you to apply this during the hour of curing or after an incision, but not now because the liquid rises too quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess occurs, remove the oil in front of the seventh day and apply to the dressing that soothes abscess; and when it is calmed, cover the eye socket and place over its face for a night each day, and remain there in the darkened room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then it leaves from the house little by little, and turns into a scab; know that no disciple should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one of ours from Yrach told us that in this land there is an occurrence of being poisoned by the breath of almonds, through which water turns into blood, but I have never seen any such thing on our land, nor do I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a novel thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are likenesses to the forms of almond poisoning, as those who do not know them may see them; and they occur primarily like this:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And there are heads of this same subtlety, and the last in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Never do various abscesses arise or are filled with pus, from which some appear like scorpions by the number of points; and if there are such that have been inflamed with fiery colors, and also pale in bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case for these joints which are exposed and not incised, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and work on its nostrils, and pour oil into those joints, and bandage them; then wrap it as to support the tender subtle bone on one side, until you know that the joint is completely set.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that cannot be closed, treat it with all subtle and gentle remedies, so that nothing is left; and if the swelling rises or abscesses appear, apply heat as needed; and if malignant abscesses occur, quickly cauterize until they are bandaged securely and have lost all pus before placing oils, wine, or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If he works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is safe; and if the moisture does not come through as it should, know that there is a joint in the bone above, where inflammation does not come easily for trimming: then you must bind with linen thread slightly thickened, and twisted by hand, leaving space between each one as needed; place the child's ears within the loop of the string at will, and stretch it gently until it enters into the nostrccoes inside the mouth; this is often done in schools for children, and it is an easy thing to do once you know how; then hold the head that comes out through one nostril with one hand, and the other head coming out from the mouth with the other hand, and check each alternately between us who are holding the strings.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this as long as you know that the worms have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the filth, squeeze out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back in place on the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments dissolve all that is tainted by foulness; and then insert a cat's pine of any substance for so many days until it is sound, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the tool used to purge the head, which allows the distillation of oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it que quiau lainee cheveit dechies est cest, puis tuil oinquant est le vains et semblant une eul liquate lesmeut ousque cheur les mote puisse enlors a chauche ouli.
de la char sor le neis	From the chariot over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the nose, and it grows and becomes quite noticeable; therefore, you must perform coping from the beginning, and remove the entire growth with forceps, then place a cautery or burning medicine over it; if not removed promptly as it grows large, be wary if it is hard, has a strange color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an encrusted boil, because when you cope once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the boil is from severe pain, not of unusual color, and you see that you can fully remove it, empty your fears and perform coping without worry, curing dryness and tightening conditions.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut (operated) and healed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when there is a continuation in one of these cartilaginous workings, it benefits little and occurs in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Thus when this happens to anyone, first examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then stitch together both sides of the incision, then treat it until it heals; and if the edges are torn apart on either side, make sure you scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then bring both sides together in a seam, bind it, and apply powdered blood of dragon by spoonfuls, and incense crumbled; then place over the powders a piece of leadwort or another similar herb, leave it until pus oozes out through itself, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of suturing is that you assemble the closure: either with needles as I have told in stomach suture, or with thread as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Occasionally there arises an abscess of a hard stone-like appearance, smaller and larger in size; then you must return the edges, and divide it on either side with a pincer, treating each part separately; after making the incision for vitriol boils, until the wound is closed; and finally heal them easily, and treat the place dry until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	From decay of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often arises decay on the gums that the ancients called "albulus"; you must support it with pincer, and cut at its root, and let blood flow or other pungent and drying powders; then apply vitriol incision on the place, or if decay reappears after incision, and many times this happens, and the cutting is repeated: it does not return after cauterization; and these are the forms of sores to cover.
des sordens	Of swelling
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At no time are they gathered at the top of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; also at no time are their teeth black and yellowish-green and worms, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth become foul; it is necessary that you make them sit between your hands, and their eyes be in your holy hand, and pull out the teeth or scraps as they appear, so long as nothing remains; thus do blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolorations, until they are healed; and if what is taken at the first cause is good, that's well; but if not, resume on the second day and later, until you have all removed; and know that teeth require various forms of medicaments to cure them, according to how the work shows it, because those rakes from which one suffers deficiency at the gums have different shapes than those used between the gangs; and these shapes and others are with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when curing teeth to remove their pain as quickly as you can, for it must not be delayed at all; because this is a matter of utmost urgency that one does not have an excuse to delay the extraction.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is weakened by illness, you should be certain of the tender tooth's condition.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the pain afflicts the patient, and he believes it is a sore tooth, and pulls the bad tooth; but in any case the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the illness remains, for we have already tried this with such saints; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, it must be scraped around entirely strong to protect the gum on all sides; then move it with your fingers or with fine pincers gradually at first touch and so forth until it is properly positioned, then firmly secure the pincers; and let the head of the shoulder be in thy saint between thine elbebones, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these liniments and put them inside both parts lightly, and move them as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and contaminated, it must be filled with rags where the roots are; and gently use pincers so as not to break while extracting; it requires careful work around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And ensure that you do not break it and leave a part behind, as this may cause greater pain for the patient due to the root's remaining infection.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware not to act as ignorant surgeons do, who often break the jaw without caution or heed our advice; but they bring about great illness from the roots that remain or from breaking the jaw. When a tooth is extracted, wash it with wine or oil and salt; if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply leech paste; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the strangulations, where one must move the joints first, have pointed tips and large knobs, which do not double when you pull on the teeth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have large members so that they do not bend when pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them in place.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the joints
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains on its way, it is necessary to place a soft cotton soaked in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 Until the nail is filed smooth, then apply the pincers called 'algofri', which make the head appear like a doctor's probe; and internally they are made like a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not wish to come out with all efforts, it is necessary that you uncover the bone entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is an iron key-shaped instrument.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be large and sturdy so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through this, it is good. If not, use all other instruments which come in various shapes as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two handles, here is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And of other things like those before regarding gums, and this instrument that seems like large pincers, which has the following form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument must not break easily, and be aware that there are many instruments for gums; and also other instruments, which cannot be counted. The wise masters of medicine cleverly discover their own tools according to the nature of illnesses and diseases they demonstrate, because sometimes old teachings did not include an instrument suitable for all cases due to variety among them; if a bone breaks or in other places, then seek the instruments that are needed as I have told you, and assist with gestures, which has the following form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and securely hold the bone, not to escape it but able to grip and extract; then restore the bone with appropriate medicines for such cases, and if there is rot in the bone, and it's small, use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not in their natural position and are unsightly, especially in young women, one must discern if the tooth is crooked or off-center afterward, and cannot be moved left or right; then straighten it. And if accompanied by a cyst with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is shown here, resembling a small beak, made of iron with a sharp pointed end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And apply the copious poultice for several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others, and if it is possible to file the visible part, file as shown in this form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And file as with the needles you make; and gently file the tooth little by little until it chips, then smooth at the end using a fine rasping tool, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites the tongue, file the roughness until even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are loose due to blows or decay, and the patient cannot apply pressure as it causes pain when biting, then treat them with medicines that restrict movement, which are ineffective; if necessary, they should be bound by a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and corrodes, but gold does not change. The wire should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; and when you straighten the teeth, take the wire and place it doubled between two healthy teeth first, then insert the probe between the teeth if there are one or more spaces, continuing carefully until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume covering up to where you started, and gently extract with skill so that they do not move; securely bind near the root of the loose tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then cut the head of the bone with pliers, and join them together, and position them between the healthy teeth, so they do not touch the tongue; then let it remain as tight as possible for as long as it can stay in place, and if it loosens, thread the wires again; if it stays put, it will serve throughout its life: this is the shape of the joints and the configuration like two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, reset it as freshly mentioned; do not interfere with anyone who is not wise and patient, and never shape it like a wolf's bone; place it back where there is a deficiency, restrain as previously described, and it will remain in position for long periods.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of copper the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 At no time should these wires be placed from under the tongue or naturally as such; whether by accident of a sutured wound; and the procedures are such that you work on the patient's mouth in healthy condition, with the head intact, lifting the tongue; then cut the nerve wire until the tongue is moved from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, it is an incision of a wound, so you pull the wire through; and ensure that the fissure is not too deep for the artery underneculed; and when done, lift the headpiece made of rosy water and ease. Then place a linen tent under the tongue so that it cannot adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 If bleeding persists, put vitriol on the wound; and if it does not stop, cauterize with a smoldering caustic lantignoine, which is good for this purpose; then treat further until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for this is a cancer; and if it is receding towards blisters, and there is moisture, then pour on the salve, and apply an ointment subtly, and remove it from both sides; and if it persists after your operation, cover with vitriol powder until healed, then return to your original work as long as you treat everything thoroughly; then raise the eyelet of soothing oil and calming substance, and treat other wounds until healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Never do the godath stones come into the throat and are properly called "II amandres," and as we have described in division how to treat them; if they are not healed, be cautious: if they are small abscesses of mild pain and flesh color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for their bleeding; but let them remain until healed, then you will split it, or it may break on its own; and if they have a pale color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument to cover, but first ensure that the abscesses rest and are soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your hand, working on the jaw and tying the brows with a cloth between your hands, pressing the tongue down along the entire instrument; and be of silver or fine iron as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with all this instrument and see the abscess? Take the needle and insert it into the almond, and pull out more than you can; then do not draw anything from the threads or sinews with it, but cap the instrument as in its form, which seems like a pair of forces; however, the head is bent, one end to another, and are very sharp, made of either untempered iron or fine.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument with tongs, use a spatula of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And you shall have a sharp blade on one side and another name on the other; and when you extract one of the almonds, then extract the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient with hot water, and with vinegar and honey, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with boiled pomegranate peel juice or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is closed; then cure it as long as it is healed. And no other abscesses appear in the throat than the two almonds, so remove them thus like the two almondnuts at once.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, that is to say, a small abscess; and so tightly closed the entire throat, such that she could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if it had continued like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so raised that it had been torn open through two points of entry on either side.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Then I immediately did it, and inserted the tube in one nostril, then the thread emerged, taking a large portion of bone; next I put another part into the other nostril through the nose, and blocked its mouth and compressed the tongue; afterwards I placed the tube in these abscesses, and partially filled one, from which only a small amount of blood was drawn out. Thus the passage of air to the woman's throat was opened up, and now she began drinking water then wine, without ceasing to cut into that abscess for long periods; the abscesses would grow back again, filling the emptied space I had created until it became very large; therefore, I deceived it and cauterized within her throat: thus it stopped growing. Then I left these areas, and only God could do anything further with it after me.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they are reduced to the eye, and it has escaped and become long, then be called "perpendicular"; and if it is from large and round, then be called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the abscess head has calmed down, and it is subtle, then it should be cut; and those which are round without being long; and they are bloody or of fat color or black, then one must avoid making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it as described regarding the nature and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we have previously mentioned; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it outwards, and cut at 1/2 inches above which I have stated in the incision of two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you do not cover at all the excess that goes beyond natural limits; for if you cover more, it will harm both speech and voice; and after an incision, follow what we have said in the incision of two almonds, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient has fear from covering, then you must apply means for the reassurance of their sense of dread.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of cautery is acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the cautery chapter, and confine with fresh warm water so that it's not too thick nor too clear; and use the pressure of this instrument as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the cut with a lore cuit l'estement du coton le chautere lesme ceut que tu mallartemant de la medicine, et saire avec est unt il mete crierleu leue cite; puisque cote la tuit tout li rele ceut.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective from incision than the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and yellowwort and origanum and rue and chamomile and arrondeau and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and let boil gently; and the pots be well stuck together from strong clay, and among the pots there is an instrument fitted according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it shall be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is suffused; then often begin anew, until the vein dries out, and ensure that at the onset of the boiling abscess you do not insert anything, for many things may occur; and do not attempt this during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a cannula and insert a feather of wax into the head, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the wax feather will not cause vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And many times perform the throat or spine of fish bone or any other thing; so that you see it then remove whatever you can see the instrument to all sunlight on the body. And if it is, do so that patient tongue at the stablié eternamons and placed in the stomach cooked piece meat inside the intestines; perhaps if he comes out of vomit away from thereof and take a sponge or any root lettuce or dry bread soaked and then let as soon it. And after, and then transfixed on herbs deemed is then.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And if the strumens are bent to enter more easily into the throat, raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglote, so it does not move or stick in the bone; adjust so that the patient places the instrument, because it should be loose where there is ease; then push until fully inserted with the entire tool evenly, as long as it remains loose.
de la sansue de la gorge	And of the swelling in the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Never is there medicine without surgery, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not work at all, then look into the throat of the patient with sunlight, then press their tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see surgery is needed, use it very carefully and precisely, or delicate pincers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that is not suitable, take a goose quill and put it in the patient's throat, then blow into the end of the feather to seal it off, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And give the patient water all day if they need it.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take plenty of cold water and work in the mouth, and pour it into their throat until they can swallow, moving their mouth often; and as soon as surgery feels the water, it is discharged.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 If it does not come out as we have said, then suffuse the patient with pine resin using the instrument I mentioned in the smoke therapy of the vein; do this many times, for it will slowly improve.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of fumigation is that you take a pot with charcoal embers and cover it with a pewter lid pierced in the middle, and insert the shoulder into the instrument; then apply the fumigation, and instruct the patient to place the cheekbone against his mouth, sealing it so the smoke does not escape but travels upwards; and the afflicted area will now improve, and if it doesn't come out, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient endure thirst, eating rotten things and ash, without drinking any water; and eventually, this management must be followed.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to extract the swelling is similar to pincers that can enter into the throat when visible and resembles a bird's beak with roughness for easy insertion, and it has a shape like this:
li chapistres des apostemes	If the shape should have abrasions; ensure smoothness or the surface where you can easily insert. And if it is rough around the edges are present in any irritated skin area, which would be cleaned with lint. Then remove the swelling by sterilize the equipment, then apply antiseptic and cover before using the instrument, soak as needed; etoilez esterilizide with alcohol:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many types of abscesses, as recounted here in this book from one to another, and they differ by perforation and incision; there are two ways it occurs, one being the same and due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is because of holes where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because the abscesses on the head are different from those at the base, and the abscesses within muscles are different from those that arise in joints, each has its own judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if with abscesses one must not cut until the swelling is dead according to its completion; and with those that it requires cutting when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like an abscess near a joint.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses occur near the joints and are left until they ripen, through chance these may rot the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When the abscess is near the main limb and if you delay puncturing until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is near the base, pierce as soon as it ripens; do not perforate an abscess that has just completed digestion, except for those near the base, preventing them from bursting, and being spread within, leading to a fistula; so they cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And if ite ait quant perciex la tire, si on les maniere est semblant doumes oltieremme. ûs'en que tu ne li aspertenent: et li croistement li apoteme en l’aposteme du mesl; and cest lorz est as pienli ou il a lea tiz qui seiz li chiete, si le metre quant a la percer.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In cases where it bulges, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 When abscesses are ready to burst, it is necessary to leave the puncture until digestion is completed as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it in front of this (point), the body's poison spreads throughout it, and it is filled with much filth; and sometimes the lips harden and its deepest parts.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscess that is pierced according to the body's width as each member requires it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary to stitch small abscesses with small punctures and large ones with large punctures, as many fissures according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that require cleaning and covering: when they become like as soft as cloth and dried up, do so similarly as one does with pustules. And for those split into three angles or punctured like a reed's sheath, as arm sores; and others made round in size, and other cuts similar to piercing cope.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, as if an abscess is superficially formed, it must be that you simply pierce it; and when the abscess is large, and has a great swelling, pierce it so not to drain all the pus at once, but drain part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, then do not draw on anything further; repeat this many times gradually, as long as the entire swelling drains.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For with each spasm of the swelling, there may be times when it causes death to the patient, and you should not worry about this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 So treat this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, cleanse the wound, and check if the size of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat surface, prepare your linen or old cotton bandages; but if there are large abscesses with much pus, ensure that each tent touches another so they meet; and if you have removed part of the skin over the abspecth, fill it with old cotton or linen rag shreds without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove the dressing and treat with ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If there is bleeding from your wound, apply cold and soothing water, and wet cloths, and place them on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bleeding continues, provide appropriate care and use the powders mentioned in this book, and if it is during winter or the area affected by an abscess is very sensitive, cover with moistened tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; if it is summer, and the swollen area is fleshy, cover with moistened cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day as we have said; then drain the abscess, apply a poultice, and treat accordingly until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to be known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one must proceed before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
des soros	The sores (les soros) referred to are likely ulcers or lesions on the skin which require careful attention and appropriate remedies according to medieval medical practices.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses come on the head, there are treatments with threads like those of a tailor's bobbin, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have moisture like hairs; and there are others that are hard and painful to the touch at the tailor's shop, and one should not doubt if the arrow causes harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the crafting of the groin involves using all instruments called "interminglers," from which shapes arise and are contained within them.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they extend beyond its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it because it returns as soon as one leaves nothing behind; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and salt, and immerse the wound, and leave until the next day; thus they come forth those that are left overnight.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And so begin the cotton swabbing again as before, on the second day and third, until you are sure it does not stay in place overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for its healing until it is well-healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is filled with pus, treat it accordingly according to this method for a long time; and apply your bandages, and scrape off all scabs, and provide all necessary care of treating wounds where it lies; and if the arrow causes you pain, do as I have instructed after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat an abscess if it is pus-filled, and trimming and cleaning as I have instructed you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And on the flesh over a suppurating abscess and the wet area, it is easier, for there is little blood in them.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and among those abscesses that I have bored through or the head of an elderly woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and scaly, and could not break it; and had one struck any of them, one would have made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads that come from children and the roots of the ears, let the incision be as deep as possible at the most dependent point to allow pus to escape; and treat them as is necessary.
des scrophules	Of scrofulas (scrofula)
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and below the shoulders, and elbows, never appearing elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each swelling is properly deep in its location as the lymph and abscess at the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these swellings.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others which are malignant and do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the case where you see good condition upon touching, and it appears similar to the color of the body, is non-swollen from all sides and is not close to the nerves or arteries, nor is it deep; then one should cut above it, peel off each part, and stretch out the two skin edges over the nodes if needed (as we have said with abscesses at the head); do so slowly but ensure you don't nick a nerve or vein, nor leave any spatulaceous or lacerating tissue that could cause fistulae, as to avoid your hand slipping and cutting unnecessarily what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 If you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then apply vitriol paste to the wound, or powders that remain in the blood, secure the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and becomes softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood has stopped, return to your work until completed; then check with your medical reference if there are any small cysts remaining, and treat and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 If there is a large vein at the root of the cyst, do not cut that cyst at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm; then treat the wound with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you treat the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and tie them now, so that there is no unnecessary lengthening due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is necessary to treat its root and drainage, and tie as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess length should be pierced at the part closest to death; and pierce in the manner previously mentioned, depending on whether they become infected with decay, then treat them with ointment and similar things so as not to corrupt what has been removed from decay; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an antiseptic salve until it is healed.
de squinance	And if it is clean until it to health as treated by: Ailment and you with ailments are gone. If the cured as much that remain, then is heal, do not they infected; apply oint them properly and cleansed after take out of it for enough as done so onght:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote of throat surgery; however, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have throat abscesses, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglute" be removed; and this aid cannot be done by these means because all the veins and the source of the patient's great heat are in those with abscesses within their mouth or throat or two limbs.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the warmth, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangling.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 When we wish to split the epiglottis, we should fracture it from above three circles or four along with a small cut across, between two circles or through the quantity of the crack, not in the cartilage; those vessels are long and numerous there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, it must be extended with a skin strip of the throat to its full length, then split the chin until it reaches the bone; drain any vessels, and if you see nothing, close off the fissure as we have said; and proven by the symptom of flying from the crack in the bone where it was broken open, along with loss of voice; leave the open wound exposed for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time comes where one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound at its base and the string tied around the splint; then administer medicines that promote heat until it is safe again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Until the throat is entirely plugged up, and the patient appears to be near death, and there's no pulse.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death; and because of this, they ordered the physician to leave the open wound until the illness has passed, which takes three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a maiden took hold of a knife and plunged it into her throat, cutting part of the tracheal cartilage; and I was called to treat them, finding them as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	and the in aiguited byzara: ougt if you m do not dele tus; Prusses f, nor so as it le de l’s.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried, stitched the wound, and treated it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maiden except that her voice became hoarse, and she returned afterward to normal; so I say there is no need for fear in handling an epiglottis injury.
de la grosse gorge	f and heal;
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses of a jet black color, and occur mostly in women; and there are two ways: natural and accidental; the natural has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental is in two ways, one similar to fat pus and the other resembles an abscess coming from us through arteries; there is fear, and it should not be operated on unless small (and) you examine and search for everything involved: if found as with our fat, without attaching to any vein, treat accordingly, as one treats nails, and trim its head entirely, if present; thoroughly investigate and cure as necessary until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many ways to heal ourselves, of which I will tell all the resemblances; and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between our cure and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the onset is fever and heat lasting until the boiling over subsides, and the putrefaction is completed; then rest for the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With us there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and we have sores, which are our own sacs and follow the body's color, starting like a blister, and becoming larger; and they resemble two things, either grains or moisture, and their colors match as I described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the patient, first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermixture", according to its form or chapter that is next.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the method of inquiring into our abscesses is to press or make it more moist where you find the abscess and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the pus has reached the skin, then extract the intruder; but be careful not to burn yourself in this.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs in a vein, whatever color it has, do as I have said for other abscesses; and if no moisture comes after the incision, consider that it is greasy, so treat it accordingly with cross-treatment, taking it at intervals, and gently scraping each side while preserving its covering where you find it; and if you cannot cure it wholesomely, then cut it into pieces so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, it often returns many times; and if some part lingers a while, and the wound is not painful, apply to the wound with corrosive ague powders, press the wound, and put soothing substances on abscesses that are warm, and treat them with other remedies until they heal properly; and if it is large, cut around the edges of the wound, and treat it as a carbuncle.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it is inflamed or otherwise worsens and apply the lead of vitriol paste, let it stay on for two days or three, until the wound heals, then return to what was done before.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 See here the forms of inserted strangulators, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them there are three quarrels which are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and among them there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses of fistulae; they are like needles with which sorcery is performed, and they come in citrin copper, or iron, or silver, and those moved by yellow ones are more effective at probing the black pus of a fistula; there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with boils having three kinds in the same way; and those with boils having three kinds, and being alike in three ways; and those with boils having two kinds, and tumors of one kind only, and being alike in three ways; all these are necessary at their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these instruments which are used are sharp, and there are some that do not cut further than one part, from which the hairs are shaved so that neither vein nor nerve is severed; and among the intermediaries are the alembeles replaced in hooks, so that the patient does not see them at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are never used except where flesh grows, such as legs, arms, breasts, ankles, and similar areas; and on no occasion is a smaller instrument made, resembling shaving of hemorrhoids, according to this form, by which blood is drawn:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at times back into position with sutures to veins and arteries, and occasionally they return according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 At no time do the nipples of any men swell when they begin to be corrupted; until they appear like women's breasts; and remain ugly and swoln, and whoever wishes to treat them should follow this form as described in line b. j up to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then remove the fatty tissue, and treat the wound with medicinal charcoal paste, then sew together the two edges of the wound to close it; and if the nipple is hanging downward, and become softened by its size as in women, make two sutures above it; so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, according to this form from line b. j up to g; then remove the skin between the two edges, and take out the fatty tissue, and treat as we have described for stitching and powders, and everything necessary in the healing process until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy or the incision isn't completely closed because the patient won't rest or due to blood loss, then you should fill the wound with cotton balls soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until what remains inside has been removed along with the fatty tissue, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise from the elbows are types of hard goiters or swellings that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those thus containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	in the r m, and i think of the text so I want to de ist, the paind't de pati; bye lest jacbtas tre ous it that:sjnus;
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like that of hard swellings, treat it as we have said for slitting hard swellings, and if the wound heals with pus, prepare the fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the disruption of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 If the artery is exposed and the skin over it is hardened, then often abscesses occur, along with vein rupture and abscess; and when you feel it on your fingers, it feels extreme pain; and if it's due to a vein, there appears significant swelling; and it is folly to cut such an abscess, especially when it is near the bones and joints or in multiple places.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 One must first remove the iron cup, and similarly with those on top, if it is inflamed above the skin, work on the bones near the abscess; then pierce the tissue until it's exposed; insert a needle underneath, cutting through to the other side of the artery as shown earlier in extracting two arteries located at temples; keep pulling on the thread tied between both ends so that nothing moves within; carefully separate the abscess edges; prepare the wound for dressing until it starts to heal; if the abscess is due to a vein, ensure you cover all of its skin with gauze from your hand as far as possible, then insert a needle beneath and cut through again, pulling on two threads so that they are pulled from opposite sides. If there's any doubt about the strength of the thread, reinsert another needle at each point along the first incision, reinforcing all four threads; afterward, remove excess tissue as much as possible, then trim off excess skin and leave it stitched up; finally, apply poultices of wine vinegar and oil until healed.
des apostemes des ners	For abscesses of the veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As well as abscesses come in arteries and veins; they also come about as nerves when struck or due to excessive work, and other similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This occurs more often in shoulders and elbebs where there are joints, and it is the most troublesome abscesses, its color resembles the body's natural color, and they have various conditions with pain; and when forcibly constrained, the patient feels intense pain, not throughout the entire body but from beneath the head, moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, upward nor downward, and those who are jointed do not need to be bound by iron: perhaps they would experience contraction; and those who have it at the neck or forehead cause swelling of the skin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, use pincers and cut it at its root; if large, suspend by the ring, strip off, then bandage and stitch up the wound to heal until healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	Large heads hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Never happens anywhere else but in the stomach and nowhere else; it is a disease called 'fungus' by its appearance, with subtle roots and large branches; and within them are both small ones and very large ones; I have seen a man who had two or three bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference, white in color, fine-rooted, split open, and full of moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6, and in making the incision it is such that you examine if the patient's flesh feels moist, with a pale white color of sinew and subtle root; carefully strip off the larger tissues, and be present when performing cauterization by fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 During tree trimming, there are often great blood losses, and if it doesn't stop on its own, then quickly use a cauterizer; and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made linen thread, tie it as we have said, and leave it for three days; then bind it again, continuously keeping tension on the linen until healing is complete, easing the process through it; and if the roots are large, be wary of covering with copper over his abdamen, but cover the majority well, then cauterize so it doesn't reopen; then treat the wound, ensuring not to cover the tumorous area that is discolored and has poor sensation and milk-white appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted syphilis, and I shall come for the treatment of this sore thereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is greatly swollen
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of an abscess comes from cauterizing a wound or tearing of the sack, and it is under the belly and in certain abdomens, as it happens in other regions, or blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or windwaters; and if it's due to the tear of the sack and the exit of the bag, then the color of the abscess is like the body's color, and it is a light thing without pain, open at various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	the t la, O;
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to moisture, it is a light thing and easily opens when pressed by your hand, do not force; and if it's due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and are inserted according to quantity; and if it's due to windwaters, it is sensitive to touching, and the signs are such that you should examine whether the appearance is from an artery's blood, or a vein, or windwaters.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is for the intestines or the bowels, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dip his artery, and extend them straight forward, then sew all around the abdomen; then command him to lie supine between your hands, then go around the area you have marked with a spermaceti spatula; then stretch the majority of the abscess above all along the great nail. Then tie it tightly with a strong thread or cord made from robust silk firmly; and let its ligament be secured; then work on the extended part of the abscess over the ligament, and apply your medicinal incision, and try to open the intestines; if you find them trapped in the ligament, remove it, and put the intestines back into place below the abdaturvus; and if you find a hernia, take hold of the spermatic cord, and cut away any excess; and if a vein or artery opposes, carefully go around them again, then return to your workspace and grab two needles, and insert the barbs on both sides, and reinsert the needles where you made a cross-shaped incision that I taught earlier; then stretch the abscess in four directions from the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal on its own; or cut away any gangrene as soon as it becomes tender and rotten. Then proceed with the care as instructed by us; and drain out any blood or moisture that you find, then tend to the wound area accordingly, and follow up on treating the abscess as I explained; and extract any blood or moisture that you find, and treat the wound area according to what is needed, and close the wound.
dou chancre	The ulcer or sore.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	In the section of ulcers, we have described their types and how to treat them with medicines and lancing cures. We will now discuss the venereal ulcer (chancre) that occurs in the genitals and requires great caution when treating; ancient sources say that if chancres are located where they can be removed, similar to those found in the neck or thighs, all must be excised at the onset. If they are large and old, one should not approach them because I have never seen any cured; nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	a t:s:
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each likeness, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and that which is treated by iron; these are only. One should not touch with iron in these two likenesses: namely tympanites and hyposarca, for it is a deadly matter; therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "bubbles" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, as all and solutions of the stomach and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see a strong patient with only dropsy, neither too young nor too old, treat him this way: lay the patient flat on your hands, and the assistant presses the belly, pushing water to the lowest part below the navel, then take the spatula bony according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let there be a cut of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And let there be a puncture at the tip and always not so deep that it reaches to the intestine when inserted; and cannot bleed. Then look if dropsy is incurred toward the intestines: if necessary, you should make an incision directly above the bend III on the right side; and if drops^sie is due to liver disease, then do so to the left of bend III; and if it's because of phlegm, then to the right, ensuring that the excess does not flow into the weakened area in which you puncture, but rather drains away. Then cut through the membrane with the instrument, apply a sealant, and cleanse your hand over the entire scrotum as if shaving an amount equal to the thickness of a fingernail; then pierce the sac until it reaches level eight, which is where the water lies, then insert this device from which follows its shape.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is similar to a silver needle in subtlety, and it is of iron or steel lightweight, and on the part below the small foramen; and where it extends from one side, there are three foramina; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the head cut so as a feather, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes trim like a quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 The top part is the shaft, when the inflammation comes to the liquid, it rises above the instrument; thus empty the majority or a third of it, because if you empty more than necessary at that time, by chance you may kill the patient due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, which causes him trembling hands or approaches death; but empty according to its strength and according to what the conditions of the virtue of the sick man signify, as well as their hairs; then move the instrument and hold back the liquid, which is now held by a clip that plugs the foramen just above the sacrum, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then continue with the instrument another day if you see the patient suffering like that, and draw out some small quantity of fluid; do this every day, but beware of flooding too much so that it cannot settle, just a little fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 If you doubt the patient and leave them with much water, then treat by burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sunlight; and color with drinks; and cure with desiccative medicines until they are healthy, and causticate on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the prevention of impotence
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There is never a child born without an opening in the penis, or if it has openings they are small, or not located properly.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it must be pierced quickly so that all of the foreskin can be cut with great delicacy according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put on the subtle plug of wood, and bind it and leave it as such for three or four days until he needs to urinate; if so, loosen him, let him urinate, and then reset; but perhaps there is no need because the urine that comes out does not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If his plug of wood is small, it is a medicinal stick as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the plug in their proper place are hindered because none can urinate if they don't lift their penis up; and cannot impregnate others because the material cannot reach the testicles, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies down on their back, and they raise the head of the penis and cover it like with a shirt as long as the foreskin needs to be cut off; and guard against excessive bleeding which often occurs, and if it does occur, then treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	From boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often these abscesses come in the penis and have an unsightly appearance of flesh; there are both malignant and benign ones; it is necessary to puncture them with a fine needle, then cleanse and bandage all thoroughly, then cover with cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; cure with refined medicated ointment until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 If the ulcer is malignant, with foul-smelling discharge, it must be treated with fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cut it out, and if the ulcer is partially deep within the hair and partly further away, remove the part of the ulcer that lies inside first; then when it has healed, treat the part further away.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Because when you treat it together, ensure the hair of the wound is not pierced, and blackness and corruption arise in the wound; if this occurs, remove all that is black and corrupted first, then apply a poultice made from pomegranate bark shavings mixed with wheat flour on it, and treat further until it is healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If bleeding continues to occur, then prepare the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauteries serve two purposes: firstly, for bleeding and corruption; secondly, if the head of the penis is swollen and receding, it's necessary to tie or guide a plumcake (cotton) on the shaft of the penis and urinate into it. And when hair at the top of the penis turns grey due to injury or an abscess in those who have not been circumcised, then you must scrape with a sharp instrument until the bindings are loose and the head of the penis is released from all sides; and if this is a severe matter, then you should scald slightly at the top of the shaft and hairs using lukewam water. Then carefully separate between them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold running water without it drying immediately.
de la circoncision	On circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not necessarily a disruption of continuity like other wounds; nonetheboever when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best possible operation, and the easiest to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not say about circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the greatest part of masters and scholars performing circumcision within half an hour, and with force; it was often considered a novelty because there were two sheets, and sometimes one sheet covered above while another lay beneath.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is regained inwardly, and the pain is doubled, and to the cleansing which is difficult by far cannot be assured at the point of the limb; and if the cleaning of the nail escapes by chance, blood flows out again, and this often occurs so that there is no need for further cleansing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing that is done by force all along the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts exactly as above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, trim evenly in all tensions; but the fillet should be well strained around the skin; and make the manner of the first operation such that you encourage the child to believe you are only winding the thread around the penis briefly, then let it breathe in all manners as possible; then make it stand upright between your hands, and let the forces return to their place without being seen by the child or showing any signs of strain; then put your hand on the penis and blow or snort, and lift it up until the head of the penis is out; then cleanse well from any filth that has accumulated there; then tie the tip with a double thread; then tie below one knot to another loop; and hold with two threads through the bag and tag, and join between the two loops; then let go gently of the top part and lift up the head of the penis; then allow some blood to leak out little by little, for this is a mucus discharge; and put powder on it from above and below using glue made from half an egg cooked improperly with pink water, mixed with good and fresh oil roses, and leave it until the next day, then treat further as needed until healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the strength in cleansing is thus: both eyes are held and sharp, and they are equally large like a pewter dish.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mutilation is when the core within flees to the incision; therefore, it must be extended with your fingernail, so that the head makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it passes three days, and what is under the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has calmed, and lightly scrape; cut as you wish to move, but protect the area of the rod, for it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore heal the sudden wounds of powder as we have said or treated with powders, and if you cut beyond measure, and it goes too high, then it will not harm; heal accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound again.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 Urinary retention is due to stone blockage, frozen blood, or bowel issues, as mentioned in the division; and if urination does not pass, and you see retention caused by a stone at the urethra near the bladebowel junction, then have the patient lie on their elbows with legs raised, place feet on their back, extend abdomen upward from the waist, and restrain until relief; then compress the bladder neck to force expression through urination above, causing release of urine; if it does not come out as described, and the patient feels great pain, provide assistance with extraction using a tool called "syringe," which is shaped like this: made of fine silver wire thin as bird feathers, about half an inch long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method of resolving urinary issues involves taking a double thread and tying it with a small piece of wool or cotton at one end. Place this head into the bladder syringe; remove excess lint and fill until reaching the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil, butter, or egg yolk emulsion. Have the patient sit on a stool, apply oil to both the bladder and penis, and massage gently. Carefully insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches near the base, then twist towards the scrotum; subsequently, push the syringe forward up to the bladwarting in my job search as a software engineer with 5 years of experience specializing in cloud computing and machine learning.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scrapes or blood coming into the bladebe seen, and putrefaction is present, and you see to distill waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument called "clinester," which is shaped thusly:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and if you pierce it three times: twice from one side, and once from the other, as you see; and the place above where medicine should be inserted so that the rod fits well without addition, allowing moisture to be drawn out, and positioned when needed; and when you see medicines in the bladder, place the head of a gouging tool into the moisture, and follow with another one attached there; then draw out the moistures through that tube, and then firmly reposition it back inside; this will allow moistures to enter there, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of enema used to cleanse the bladder: such is this.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 It is silver or copper, and the head is higher; from under one shoulder do the ligaments tear apart; then take an inflated sheep bladder and insert the moisture you wish to use for enema into it, then tie the two breasts together with a strong double thread, and heat that moisture over fire; then pour the head into the enema tube, then stretch your hand over the bladder as soon as all the moisture reaches the bladder; if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle on it, and pierce it roundly through; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then secure the circle like fastening a stitch, and put in what you desire of oil, moisture, and water within the instrument; do as with the bladder, to squeeze with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and medicines together; and we have said the difference between stones with veins, and all signs, and which stones require cutting work; and on the bladder, and on the penis; and I will openly and briefly tell you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones which originate in the bladder often occur in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladeback similar to water flowing through its subtlety; and there are frequent discharges, and they irritate the male genitals, causing them to hurt many times, then become strangulated; and these stones affect the foundations extensively. It is light for children's healing until they reach four years old, it is most severe in elderly people, and moderate between youth and middle age; and the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema in order to expel all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it never hinders one from searching for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the hips, and stand them up straight, tilting their pelvis backward so that the stone descends to the front of the bladebox, without ever rising above; then make the patient sit between your hands carefully positioned, with their hands below their thighs, ensuring the bladder is completely inclined forward; then feel and touch inside. If you sense the stone in that space, hasten to cut into it immediately.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not come out upon touching completely, grease your left index finger with oil, and insert into the child's body or middle of their palm, depending on whether the patient is a youth or an adult; then push in its foundation, feel for the stone, and when you sense it at your finger, widen the col of the bladebox; then press under your finger, and expel the stone to where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and tells him to extend upwards with his right hand the fingers (to check for any movement), and with his left hand, remove the skin that is below the joints where they are tailored; then insert the spatula (a medical tool) gently: this is its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And they make between those who are between the hips and the base, not in the middle but on the left side of the nape; and it is right above the stone, and your thigh should be close to either foundation or base, and its length should be wide from below, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps press so that the thigh near the base can move freely without effort; and know there may be a part of the stone or angles, and margins: these are easy to extract; and if attached where it is used, like sand, and round, whose extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 When there are angles and margins of the stone, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must use tongs similar to files at their top, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put your instrument with a subtle curved end on top; and if you cannot capture it this way, enlarge slightly the opening a bit, and if there is cortex, then strain with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first extract the largest at the bladder's neck, then near the urethra, then the longer part, and the small ones afterwards if there are others.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, one must sew it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For there are two things that happen to the patient: either they die or urine comes out as their bladder cannot seal itself again; however, make sure to try drawing or cutting with pincers and tweezeburns until you have treated it in pieces; once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, tie it off, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to cool the inflammation; then bandage the patient on their neck and do not remove the stitches until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, apply a lot of oil and water to the area; then treat with diafiniton ointment and basilicon ointeen until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 When abscesses occur in the wound and corrosions, and blood congeals in the bladder, causing urine retention known to be without color with the urine: then apply your finger into the wound, extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladasters and peritoneum; then cleanse the wound of water, dirt, and hair, and aid in all ways you can until healed; and it is necessary to tie both thighs when treating him, and gather medicines at the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it has been carried from the testicles, lodged inwardly, preventing urine flow; treat as I have mentioned before, by dilating many times through this procedure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have also observed this to happen thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron saw of this shape, with three sharpened points on one end.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a thread around the shaft beneath the stone and ensure it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently insert the probe onto the shaft until reaching the stone; turn the probe slowly in your hand against the stone, as far as you can pierce through from the other side; urine will soon flow out, after which press your hand where there is remaining inside of the stone within the sheath.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken immediately and moves out with the urine, leaving the patient relieved; if you cannot do this due to any obstruction, then insert a thread below the stone and one above, then widen the sheath at the point between the stones, then extract them forcefully, remove the suture, cleanse the frozen blood in the wound, and treat it until healed.
de la piere des femmes	From the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that stones are found in women, and if it occurs repeatedly, the condition is serious, and there are three reasons to avoid it: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will uncover herself before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 This is the third way if sometimes you cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman is more deeply embedded than the man's stone, so it requires a deeper incision and much fear. If necessary, signs suggest such an occurrence, then one must engage an experienced midwife with minimal charge, and if you cannot find one, seek out a very skilled wise woman or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform what you instruct in the examination of the stone; and look carefully whether the woman is a virgin. Then she must properly place her fingers or hands and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it down from its source, and advise her to put her hand or with the patient's left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If she dislocates the shoulder joint, one must gradually move it from just below the collarbone up to near the hip, until it reaches the top of the thigh; then manipulate at the hip against the ball of the joint where it becomes misaligned, and feels the bone in that area; do not move its arm over or under the dislocation, but immobilize with a splint first. Then apply heat to the splint if you sense the bone is still improperly positioned until it can be correctly aligned again, recognizing many types of fractures: small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, some having spurs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you observe similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the stone is not moved, then apply vitriol paste, and keep it warm for an hour until it loosens; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard, and use the treatments I have mentioned in the extraction of stones from patients to assist you in your work; and if the stone is not moved, and it's a vein that has been cut, apply powder at the location and bind with bandages and splints, do not try again on this one, leave the stone and do not attempt to remove it unless the patient dies suddenly; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the blood heat is appeased, and the swelling has subsided, return to your work, until the wound is strong.
de hernie carnouse	les et: M; t unt. Flower que I'i that th ndroit.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	It is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white fascia, which protrudes from below the knee joint that contains the thigh; and it is called "syface," and never properly in the tissue of the thigh, if one thinks this is another joint; and it is the leather-like tissue between the white syface we have mentioned; and they do not possess such.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the genesis of this hernia is from weakness in the joints, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And never come from percussion on the joints, and this fluid has many colors: either it's declining to jaundice, or it lacks color, is black, or clear water-white, and such occurs often; these are signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and spongy as we have described, then the abscesses reasonably come quickly, they do not open like an egg's shape, and never on their own because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If there is moisture in the sinew itself, then abscesses arise with part of the fatty tissue, and one thinks it is another vein; if the moisture is between the skin and subcutaneous layer, it feels warm all over; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, test thoroughly in every area concerned, as was seen before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to its contents.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be placed comfortably as able and have full body coverage; then place them on their back, onto something slightly elevated, and cover them generously with cloths; then position yourself on their left side, commanding your assistant to stand on the right, extend a rod towards one of the lower ribs near where it meets the sternum; then take the scalpel handle, carefully cut through the skin along its length up to the wrist joint, and make a straight incision without cutting into the bone beneath; then puncture the fat pad cleanly with clear water, and retract the tissues so only the fat is exposed; then extract all fluid, and then apply dressing, and raise the fat. Do not touch the ribs themselves but solecupltate the fat. Carefully cut through any attached structures as best you can, otherwise fluid may return; and if the vessel bursts during your work, have them sit up in their place once you've completed the procedure on the fat pad; then suture together the two edges of where it meets the sternum like other wounds until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint is affected by another illness, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are swollen, suspecting an excess of blood; then cut the bone from all along the swelling, and draw out the joint, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 If it is joined in two parts together, know that they are two branches; cut the other part as you did the first equally, then draw out the blood, and apply cloth soaked in oil to the wound; place another moistened cloth with wine and oil on top, and put over quilts lined with fabric, and lay it upon all along according to this method:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two quilts and stuff them with shredded wool according to this pattern and stitch together in the girdle of trousers, one end up to the backside, and the other on the inner elbow; and the other pair on both forearms, and be completely fastened within the loop of the pants; nowhere is medicine like this caustic band applied instead of an iron cupping set, so take a fine caustic cup, cut the skin of the joints, and heat them as we have said before, that the clear liquid white matter contained inside is exposed; then take the caustcuper according to this pattern, puncture it with needles, and scrape off with the hot sharp caustic.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways that you can see, as long as it reaches everything; and keep watch so the eye does not touch the eyebrow; and know that this work is more healing; and move carefully to avoid bleeding and cuts from incision; and if anything opposes you or an abscess arises or blood flow issues or other things, then treat what opposes you, as previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horror, then make an incision as I tell you, and it's so that when you are well assured by the meanings we have said, immerse yourself in water; then seat the patient on a raised platform, lift up the affected area, perforate the abscess at the wide part of the tissue, and insert the incision along its length throughout the body; make sure the orificcuits are large so that all waters flow freely; then put cotton over it, bind it, and let the remaining water drain out, then treat the wound until it is healed; if the swollen band does not allow the water to seep into the mouth of the wound, you must insert a tube or the instrument used for treating fluid from dropsy as I described beforehand; enlarge the wound slightly and know that the water will return, gathering after six months or so, and when it is gathered again as before, the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	From an abscess of boils
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 That in the section of this branch there are various arrangements due to fear in many cases, which seems to me it is better to leave as is; and I will tell you the procedure and resemblances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from the body and especially the joints; and this is most often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is to know about excessive bitterness and ague, which spreads in the joints or by percussion; and the color of an abscess according to the color of the body; there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess; and sometimes are frightening and piercing abscesses with mottled colors, and never come from us of arteries, or swelling of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from us of arteries, it is known by the appearance of hot abscess when you press against your fingers; and it does not need to be touched at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 He who is swollen with veinous issues can be identified by his tendency to react at the touch of tendons, and may well perform an incision in this manner, and on other body parts; then remove the core of the joint, extend it upwards, and treat the surrounding white flesh, freeing the suspensory from all sides of the muscle.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the muscle is already soaked with these veins and tendons, then it must be treated by cutting the muscle, and removing its core; and if it is hard within the fascia, or in that which lies among the vessels, one must release all of this tissue, and roundly excise.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the humerus is behind where it should be, one must cut off all and remove the nail as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your treatments are complete, if you wash the wound with clean cloth in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedebies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	From an abscess of boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped by a wrapping resembling bark, with the softening of tendons, and it moves quickly when approached; and its treatment for this disease is as frightful as that before, so we will advise on the procedure according to how the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a stool, then apply the suspensory to their arms, around all the muscles close to the spine, and tie them tightly; then bandage with a sharp trennacle across both ends of the muscles until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a needle or if it has double thread, and fasten at the first place where blood appears, and securely to the other end; then bandage evenly according to body length, and press any corrupted moisture points; then treat the wound as with all other applications of powder, ensuring that none of the muscles swell; because by this means no harm comes, and wherever blood appears in all vessels, it is necessary to drain the muscles completely; so that the joints do not lose their normal position due to the incision of muscles, and stay dry and can be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	From a ruptured sack
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The outcomes of this branch are by the section that comes from bruising or swelling in the abdominal area near the ankle bones, causing the intestines to descend on one side; and this descent is either due to bruising or extension, occurring in these two ways for many reasons: from a blow, jump, cry, lifting heavy weight, and through similar things; and the signs when it's from swelling are that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and abscesses are equally distributed towards the front because the bruising forces the intebines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's from the severed spleen, causing sudden pain at first, and diverse abscesses appearing below the skin, due to the issue of the intebines and the body part afflicted by the severed spleen.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no more times within the intestines and are held therein, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron to cause fear, it is necessary to dispel it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to cleanse the intestines in his hand at the inside of the wound if he can insert it; then support the testicles with both hands, and lift the cuffs; then extend the head upwards, and strip all the leather from the thighs as needed for opening the wound, and use such that you can expel feces; then scrape off the swelling beneath the skin of the thigh until it is entirely removed; then insert your index finger in the part between the white swelling which is below the belly, between the first swelling and the second one, removing what lies behind the belly, and between the first and second swellings; and direct with your right hand to the cuffs' head and lift the white swelling upwards towards your left hand, lifting all feces toward the belly; and command the attendant that he extends the thigh upright and removes whatever lies behind it; then insert both fingers if there is intestine wrapped or hardened skin, and if you find anything else, push into the abdamen; then take a needle or a thread made of 10 threads and put it at the back part below the swelling; after the belly, then cut off the chaps that appear from these threads as long as there are four threads; then tie them together like a cross and tie up the thigh beneath which we mentioned is below the cuffs' skin with a strong knot made of two parts; then wrap the threaded chaps so no bacteria can enter, ensuring that infection does not occur; finally, put the initial knot according to the first long knot using both fingers and after these two knots leave the swelling beneath the cuffs' skin as wide as a finger; and onwards with the other size of the thigh where we have previously mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	On any occasion are cauldrated the festering sores as we have said, after incision, due to concern over blood flow complications.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens, leaving the bandage on until it comes off by itself; and if it is delayed in falling off, raise it with warm water as we have said, until it falls off; then treat the wound with further treatment until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	les et: M; t unt. Flower que I'i that th ndroit.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a joint being put together with a screw, in such a way that you fasten the vessels after shaping them slightly over the bone; then wrap and cover, and treat the abscess from what works, until the threads fall off; and cure it as we have said, until it heals perfectly.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Never comes out the spleen, as we have said, and open the eyes; and no intestines come loose from their ligaments, and if they do, it's little, and all heal in hours; however, if it remains too long at this point, then a hernia or hydrocele occurs until the intestines slip out; and this happens through the extension of hydrocele within the antrum, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swol cushioning and open. The treatment is done by caustic as we have previously mentioned: and that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then cover the enlarged area with a length according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the hydrocele under the skin layer from where it protrudes, then take the thread and place it over the visible part of the hydrocele on the head of the thread, and hold both. Then extract the top part of the thread, and do not cover or extend anything related to the scrotum, as I have previously explained in the treatment of intestinal coccyx with a suture; then treat it by wound care method.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you bind the wounds, if they are unclean and treat the injury, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The fistula is tight and has no external opening in the course, and the fire cautery is less effective at this location, and closer to being curable.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From the softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints is softened in some people because of moisture inside that becomes mollified and appears milky; when one wants to clean it, make the patient lie on their back with the affected area exposed, and clip off the overly mollified skin from the natural skin; then stitch together the two edges into a single seam, and if you look, do so first by removing the excess softened skin in three or four neatly placed sutures; then cut between the sutures, and treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healthy again.
dou chastrement	From the act of pounding
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 I have heard of these afflictions in our laws, and for this reason, I would not speak of them in this book; however, there are two reasons why they are necessary: the first is that healers should respond when asked about them and their treatment, and the second, because we often need animal punishment to help us, such as with goats, sheep, donkeys, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say therefore that afflictions are caused in two ways: by attraction or by puncturing.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the way we cause afflictions by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its joints become soft and flexible; then pinch it with your hand until they are restored and no longer feel painful.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the procedure of cutting: it is proper to hold the animal, and press its hide at the hocks with your left hand, then attach the suspender, and bind over each joint after you have properly scorched them; and leave no small part tender or subtil tendon near the bones; this method of cutting is more effective than that made by attraction because in the latter case some parts of the hocks may remain, causing the animal to desire lust. Then heal the wound until it is cured.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are individuals or organisms that possess both male and female reproductive organs, allowing them to produce either spermatozoa or eggs, depending on their species' biology. This condition can occur naturally in some plants, animals, and even humans (though human cases often result from specific genetic or hormonal factors). Hermaphroditism plays a significant role in the reproductive strategies of many organisms, allowing for diverse methods of reproduction such as self-fertilization or increased mating flexibility within populations.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 A hermaphrodite is according to two ways in humans: one where between the two gonads they resemble as those of a woman's body, and sometimes it urinates there.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is among women, with swelling of their fingers like a rod and strings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of men and women involves removing all stones from their bodies and curing them as with other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine shoots through the sheaths of strings, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Of the tempting nature
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 An inflamed stone is lodged in the natural part, too unsightly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, which requires treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You must grasp the excess of the inflamed stone with your hand or fingers and remove it gently; and do not pull too hard to avoid bleeding, then treat it further until it is healthy again; and for another type that appears at the mouth of the urethra, which is inserted and sometimes forcefully expelled, and it resembles a cow, hence they called it in ancient times "malady cowee.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to treat it as we have said in the experiment, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratic refers to something that behaves in a way that is not predictable or consistent; in this context, likely referring to the erratic behavior of an inflammation.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If it is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the cervix is small; and it is natural by birth or due to illness that occurs therein; or it's caused by a hardy push, or a subtle syphilis or spasm, and is formed mainly in the thighs, legs, or buttocks; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly childbirth; and recognition of this condition can be determined by observation during labor.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the hernia appears nearing, either on your thighs or groin.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is such that the syphilis is subtle and there are two sores, act quickly, and apply thus: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then extend the two sides of her body fully so that the subtle syphilis can emerge, and cover the eruptions; then take wool, and cotton in oil, and put it upon the sores, and keep the affected area covered each day until they heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilis is hard and spreading, it is necessary to gather leaves of myrtle similar to papery sheets.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the eruptions are of blood, bind them with a spiderweb and treat; and have the cleansing medicines like oxblood, dragon's blood, incense, abundantly mixed with wine; then prepare a large bandage so that the wound cannot suture; thus be continuous, and make a tent of dry linen; then proceed to other cures until healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 When there is a hernia near the groin, it must be covered as follows in this manner, unless it's an advanced abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 Because of an advanced abscess located in the groin, one should not attempt to treat with fire cautery.
des emorroides	When hemorrhoids occur due to excessive strain or pressure in the veins of the rectal area; and it results from natural causes like aging, pregnancy, chronic constipation, or obesity, causing discomfort, pain, and possible bleeding; then you must first address the underlying cause.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Efforts are abnormal vein openings, and when the efforts become old and hardened; in which we have discussed their appearances, signs, and I will now say those that respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that efforts and hardening in the groin are fully formed, not felt except by iron treatment.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are at the mouth of the groin can be felt and treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Then it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the ulcer with tongs, and scrape at its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, as they do with dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then wrap her feet for an hour on parchment, then put them in very cold water; and if bleeding resumes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranates and gallnuts and such things, and then take wheat flour, and knead with honey and oil, and form it into a paste on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if bleeding ceases, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, apply air suction to the back and on the nipples without causing pain; then take linen, and the hair with juice of plantain or elderberry mixed with old wine, and apply at the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when an abscess is healed, treat the area with ointment until it becomes clean; and that which is called "albatross" turns red and appears like a sharp chief, as I have previously explained in detail; then care for it until it is also cleaned.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscesses come from the glands, such as syphilis and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, erysipelas, styes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, burning abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Thus it is necessary that in this treatise I speak of the burning abscess which comes upon the marrow, not just any boils; and if you know how to observe with a probe, look at whether the abscess is acute and beginning its onset, and hot and feverish, and if it becomes red when you see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hasten to puncture it, but let the pain be eased as much as possible; then have the patient sit on a chair with two small seats that they can lean against, and support their back and bring together the separated parts of the leg; keep their thighs spread out, and place their arms below their hips, and bind them well with good linen; then let the instrument be placed toward the right side ribcage, and adjust the tool used for working in the mouth of the marrow, after which comes its form; it is necessary that when you see this instrument being adjustamo nt, insert a probe to determine how deep the marrow is, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not hurt the patient. And if the extensions are larger, cover the depth of the marrow with dressings, so that the extensions do not injure; and ensure that the cone of the instrument is placed above, and dye the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 When the abscess is opened and treated with soft hand washing, it should be covered on the head, in a spatula-like manner; and when the bowel is emptied, one must put pliant bandages soaked in rose oil or dried green oil into the wound; place the strong bandage at the front of the artery and neatly along the arm and hand with soft water boiled with mallow leaves; then treat after two days of ointment application until it is healed; never lift the artery or wound by enema using water and honey, then water or lily root extracts soaked in oil that are long-cooked; finally return to ointment treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 If the wound is healed on the arm, it must be that you treat it as we have described in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is necessary first for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth, and recognize the signs when a woman begins to dilate and desires to smell urine: then quickly comes the baby out; thus you know that such childbirths follow the natural figure, and the issue is from its head, with twins alongside it. And when you see these signs, one must gently press her belly so that the baby emerges soon because as it moves onto its head, there are accompanying twins, and the excessive membranes of its coverings have been properly cleansed; those who come otherwise do not naturally occur.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At times it comes upon his feet, and strikes the body or the head, and the hands, where it comes upon his belly, or behind him, and is turned by chance about his neck, and in other malicious ways; thus it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out naturally from the head and the mother labors heavily, and the strength of her veins is weak, then she should sit on a stool or be held by women; and prepare natural oils such as fenugreek to cook, and then put it between her thighs the small suppository of this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And cleaves the second bone, and wraps it in a sponge as long as the moisture that is within hurries forth; then squeezes the woman's belly until childbirth descends, and if not delivered, one must enema the woman with muscatel wine made from fenugreek oil: then press her and induce vomiting for an hour: now deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the hands are stretched out too much, you must gently and gradually reset them; if they cannot be reinserted, place a stool under her feet, lift the legs upwards; then stand the stool on the ground and support the woman so she does not strain while standing; if the hands still cannot be reinserted and the child is dead, clasp the hands with the cord previously placed in front, extract the child, and reset it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From underneath the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes up onto his feet, you must lift him slightly higher; then gently turn him little by little until he is levelled; then pinch his toes and extend them gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it jumps up to the knees, if commanded to press, and has spit from condition; if it jumps again, so God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if not as we have said, if turned a little at a time until it is in its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it should be gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come as we have done, then take musk essence, and linseed oil, and melted wax; mix with the woman's nature within, then apply this ointment to her body and leave overnight until below the ribs; when she is moistened below, place a leather collar of myrrh on her, and keep it there for an hour; have her sit in a chair, then make her cough and strain her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, as now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From under the child's knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes into this form, put your hands gently on it; then lie it on its back, and let its feet hang downward, and lay it with its face to the ground; and bend its hands gently, and then press its hands over its stomach, and support the spine underneath until it's properly aligned; if the child doesn't cry out, shape their legs normally, then move the belly forward, then turn your hands; and rock the child gently; and command the woman to pump while the child is being delivered.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	line:f; oug by themd (and le.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It's necessary to engineer returning the hand: if it cannot be returned, lift the woman and stand; if she cannot stand, lay her on a bed with legs extended; then arrange the muscle as I described; and if she doesn't deliver, have her sit on a stool, and attempt to return the hand; rock the child naturally, and induce sneezing, and command that she pump until the baby is delivered.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	After birth, place the baby's head on its side, and spread out its hands, with the face turned toward its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the barber colors his hand, then turns it slightly and gently warms it; and when it is evenly heated, apply musk and oil as we have said, then instruct it to move slightly; and after you have done this, make it sit on a chair, and command it to bend.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all subsequent cases.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it arrives in this manner to the second finger, wrap your fingernail with moisture still present; and if there is a bump on its face or neck, loosen the wrapping so it's not held tightly, allowing movement of the swelling; then insert the object inside until properly positioned as needed, and command the woman to move her finger occasionally: only then can you do this gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From dislocation of the knees
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Surgical procedures cause many cases of dislocation, but never three or four at a time; this is not an unusual occurrence and seldom happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that do not live if they lack something: I know what they multiply and can be defeated by the syphilic bubo which has them bound to it; occasionally, they emerge naturally as all others under us have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they emerge severely, and are treated as we have said, with the subtle bubo, and quickly and easily does what it must do; thus making them move towards healing.
de plusors enfans	the liits ça de la:
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are never formed in stages I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they always take the form of an infant by the measurement with a glorious sage's tool, which is why the subtle bangs must understand it all, because occasionally similar things happen; thus doing what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman who has given birth to a dead child or one in the womb, as I have said earlier, and there is no force, and you must perform manual labor; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound health and does not have an accident or fear death. It should be such that the woman lies supine on her back with her head turned to one side, legs raised; then minister by cutting two parts until she is treated through delivery of the child. Then rub the mouth of the uterus with moistened oils mixed with musk and fenugreek and flaxseed oil; then apply those oils and musk mixtures to her hands. Next, place it gently in the uerterum so that when she pushes, they are tightly clamped. Be aware if the fetus is presented such that it descends on its head; then insert the forceps into her fingers or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or chin or near the elbow or close to the ribs. It should be done so that you hold the clamp with your right hand, and put a pad between your thumb and index finger of the left hand, gently press the forceps into any one of these places until it achieves its purpose; this is how the form of the clamps works.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then place against the other occiput as needed for extraction so they are even; and then extend equally by moving from one side to the other in order to release them, with the occipital bones fitting together for movement, just as shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if any part remains, apply oil to some of its joints and insert it into that area while treating the other; and if none remain there, place this occiput or higher in position, adjusting until they separate completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back together, then wrap it above the arm to immobilize; subsequently bandage at the joint base or with a splint; thus you should do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If the child's head is large and protrudes at birth, or if there is a sharp bony protuberance, it is necessary to push the spatulous spear between your two fingers, making the head and extracting water; then place it on the instrument called "almidach," from which form comes with strainers or chaplets that follow this, so make the child have a large natural skull; and then heat up the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps hot and is constrained by force, fracture until the moisture that is at the wrong place drains; and if it cannot drain, crush it into pieces as much as you can pull apart; and if swoleblown on the belly or below the ribs, make a small incision so the fluid flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	; they all the arn’re t:  ons the And so far the w. The Probar: Mobsergloonus; 0 (or vckta combt; it TA quL't. After; you can do(an/her et la ou l'colte in English
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is difficult in the abdomen or udder, if necessary you should strain it with a drape wrapped around by hand; and work on the abdamen or udder until the moisture that is there recedes; and if other members are distorted, and the head remains dislocated, then press your hand firmly into the marrow, and pull to the base of the marrow; then insert an ointment or poultice, and apply it strongly; and if the opening of the marrow is closed due to a pus that has come in, do not exert yourself, rather you should provide moist and fatty substances; and let these be soaked in water and made soft.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 If the child is on his back and you can set him straight as we have described for a living child; and if he cannot be moved at all, then pull gently by segments, leaving nothing of the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, if it follows as we said for abscesses that come into the bones; and if bleeding occurs, then put in an iron bandage to restrict further movement, and provide other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had given birth to one dead child, then she conceived another, and the other was born dead as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	t time de c.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and pondered for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attracting forceps, and extracted one bone at first, then others after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very puzzled because their belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	the t de et les so that est f, ou:
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I speak of the wound and injuring hands so that the patient is better in a long time; and it remained thus for a while, with some improvement from its place; but this chapter was strong only because when masters encounter a strange thing, they knew how to apply remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the head of the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of compression, at which one can read books; and two turnings are two shoulders of two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 In any case, the horn should be more subtle in adjustment and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the instrument must be wide, with tree margins one finger width apart, and long a half palm; and between the two joints there are two adjustments of the same piece, which are firmly secured on both sides, half a palm in length or slightly more; these two adjustments are inserted into the margin openings to turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made from ebony or boxwood wood according to the shape of pliers; and it has two horns with adjustments one palm long, and fingers wide apart; when you see opening the margin with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed with her feet extended and legs elevated, then insert both adjustments together into the margin, and keep the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand all over the instrument as evenly as pliers, according to the quantity you see opening the mouth of the margin, until she does what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all of the same kind, and they have multiple similarities; and when the surgeon has prepared them, so much more quickly is the work done, and higher in quantity at home.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	; they other. And:
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the secondine is held during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to retain her fecal matter, and then induce labor under those conditions, and restrain her hands at the mouth and nose; if she soils herself in this process, that's alright.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take a pot and make it a lid or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare (patient), such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia glycyrrhiza, and centaurium; all these herbs, or any of them, should be boiled or soaked in water over fire; then place a cloth or cover with one side on the pot's edge, and the other end in the mare'prise mouth, and wait for vapors to come from within the mouth; then induce labor as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his right ear becomes inflamed again, apply treatment promptly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it remains after this treatment and is not weakened, command the nurse to moisten her left hand with olive oil or musk juice of ambergris, and then apply it into nature, and if she wants a rebound; when she has found it, pinch and stretch it gently and straightly so that the bone does not protrude during extraction; but it should be moved lightly to the right and left, and then tugged. It will return and readjust itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the bone is extended too much, we have mentioned the treatment of inducing sneezing and fumigation with herbs; if it does not recover from all that we have said, ensure you do not neglect treatment; but it must be tied to the thigh of a woman, then enemaed with medicinal tetrapharmacist oil; this will bring relief and strengthen it. However, when it starts to emit foul odor in the stomach and head, causing discomfort to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary therefore, fragrant incense should be used here: none of the old methods have tried incense of wormwood and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retention of seeds and semen is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is to resemble a cage, and the head is subtly positioned in nature, with wide shoulders near fire; and it undergoes smoldering above the coals, and tinea until it's consumed, and begins anew another one.
de percier lou fondement	To uncover the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Young children are born who do not have the proper foundation, but their veins are finely spread: thus it is fitting for the midwife to puncture those fine vessels correctly and not the main vein or artery, and she must be cautious so as not to touch them; then apply moistened linen with wine and oil, followed by ointment until they are healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not heal, then apply a bandage of lead and let it remain for days, and the child may be bled when it is ready to go back to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	At no time does this swelling from a wound or abscess occur; if it happens, address the suturing: treat it as we have said about the thread of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	For the drainage at the base (of an organ).
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodules, and swellings that arise near the foundation below or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several; and when such nodulation is old, they work, and due to moisture awash with clear or subtle pus, and these fistulas never occur; known by what happens from discharge or flatulence when the patient passes stool, and occasionally by an odor like eggs.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if to abscesses that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to three-quarters of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and our outer thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one finds the persistent abscess at the base [of an organ], which does not bleed; and it is that you should push your index finger or thumb to the base, and insert a fine needle of willow bark or iron into the abscess where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twisting, then you should insert a fine tube or horse hair as long as you feel the tube or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there are no signs of pus discharge or windiness as we have said: know that it does not pierce.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the urinary tract, if it leaks urine and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then the tube comes up near there; if there is no twisting and infection causes great pain: you should simply bend it backward, and nothing helps this kind of persistent abscess but labor without medicine or salve. And foolish people's curiosity does not find a solution.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In the case that is not too fearful and not old, with hope of health by means of iron as I have tested, it is so that the patient lies between your hands on their back; you lift their legs up to their thighs, and keep their thighs inclined towards their belly; then place a tent of linen or cloth if there is any twist until you know where it settles.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels pressure at the base, it is necessary for you to place your index finger there, and if you sense then that the tent has been perceived; and when you feel between your finger the vein or artery, then understand that it is sensitive; do not disturb it unless one cannot heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 On can in any way instruct someone on how to properly dress a wound, but it rarely works; and the assistance provided when performing this procedure, as described before, involves using a subtle caustic according to the size of the fistula, inserting it until it reaches near the foundation; and doing so two or three times, ensuring that the threads used are melted, which resemble an eagle's feather; then treat with grease-soaked swabs until they dissolve, then apply a healing ointment binding both thread and suture.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If thus cleansed, it is well done.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If so cleansed, it cannot be done in another way; and if it lies between and does not pierce to the foundation, ensure there is a thick covering of thread or silk between your two fingers over which you observe the fistula that exudes through the coverture as soon as it appears; then close the beginning of the funtile, insert again before the stitches, apply caustic afterward until it reaches the top of the tissue; once released, cut off those threads resembling an eagle's feather and leave none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not yield, cut between you and the flesh; if fire or medicinal cautery is used.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Fire cautery brings together two things: removing hardened pus and stopping bleeding from veins, as well as drying out moisture; then healing dirty bandages using boiled fat or crushed herbs until the wound is free of blood, and making incisions where necessary for painful swellings, along with applying dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it remains secure and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near to the root of its foundation, and is distant from the body, inspect whether it involves the thumb or wrist.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the sacking (swelling), and there is fabric or fat within it that needs to be pierced, if you have hope and faith, use one of these three methods: either cauterize as we have said, cut downwards to the root, or if possible clean and treat as first; do not remove too deeply, lest you damage what holds the foundation, then allow natural drainage by any means necessary; then heal it as previously described. If successful, leave the layer removed close to the base or remove and cleanse it using a suitable instrument before treatment of the area below; then address the misplaced tissue within the wound as much as possible; finally, work on closing the wound while keeping the fistula towards the back part lower than the base. It would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 At no time are there bulging wounds in this manner: and when the tent is placed on the ulcer, it lies close to the foundation near the skin above, so take a pierced tent according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert a twisted thread into two places, and attach the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is protruding at the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that pierced tent so you can place your thumb or foundation on it; and pull the head of the filament, and join the two heads together, holding one to the other, and leave for 1 day or 2; do not release again until the threads have woven what is between them and fray. Then treat the wound until it is sutured and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, then pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too thick-walled.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	the t;
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the staple spiny used to create a fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, for it does not completely pierce nor should it be so pierced, as you see here:
des emorroydes	From hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 There are two ways they occur: either within the foundation like resin grains, and there can be small or large ones with some blood and sometimes one or more, which weaken the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are weak have little moisture, and either a bit of citrine water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body. The treatment for these within the foundation is to instruct the patient to squeeze until the foundation comes out completely, and then appear the threads; do not hurry, and hold them with tweezeb
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to treat the wound in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the other side with the needle, and turn both ends of the thread away from the needle so that they are double; tighten the thread firmly, then pull the thread, and remove the neede
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Immediately with great force or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens immediately in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the illness is old and medicines are no longer effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape the point of a splinter or your fingernail with its surface, leaving it not moistened; then heal it until it becomes sound as needed; and if it cannot be sounded, resume scraping more vigorously than before, until it is thoroughly burnished; then heal it until it is healthy.
dou fremit	caressé escorde, si come the long as on them; quant esterse les long.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A mouse is a small creature found on the body, and goes about much; never does it feel cold to the touch, and feels just like one would upon death from shivering, and spreads throughout the entire body, and more in the hands than other areas.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the remedy is to take an acorn from a goose feather or a strong vulture's quill and place that acorn over the shivering, so it encircles all around; then turn your hand, rotating the acorn completely around the shivering, spreading it throughout entirely, and uprooting the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle underneath and across on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Not perceiving it, hold with both hands, and squeeze them; And if you see it, cauterize the tremor as before or with a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	le: by the Nd (t
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never have you made an enema of silver or copper, or melted wax or ointment; and never have you applied these small and large plasters according to how they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that we prepare in the treatment of children who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of both small and large enemas is to be above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And there is an abnormality or the belly being bound together, as you see, and the child's eyes are pierced through; and have one of its sides sliced open, and in the other side too; and put remedies from a pouch made of beast hide or parchment into the belly, and perforate all around the small slits, keeping equal space between each slit, then insert a strong thread of twisted silk through these holes, and sew it together as one would with a goat; and when the remedies are inside, tie them securely to the instrument using a strong filament, then enema is administerwed; and this forms a complete circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 Let the medicines be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with ointment of oil or butter of egg, or similar substance, then apply it gently; then press upon it by its II sides together until fully covered, then remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs up to view, and if the medicine seeps out, do so as much as possible; and if he sleeps through an entire night undisturbed, then greater help is achieved.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you issue the clyster in a disease of bowel movement, and the physician wants to issue it promptly, then do so until they are well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 If the hemorrhoids are present or abscesses, make an enema as subtle as for a child; and this is the shape of the subtle enema to which one ties the skin.
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In the section on wound care that we have mentioned earlier; now we will discuss treatments for hands and general ailments according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are varied depending on what they are caused by, and based on their origin or type of injury, and why they occur.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 Things by which wounds are made are from piercing of stones, and cutting with swords and axes, or lances or clubs or arrows, or similar things; or those that occur according to the nature of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or the head, or the thigh, or the abdomen, or liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, beginning with simple wounds of the head, for memory will come in its place.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from piercing of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect an inflamed abscess: immediately bandage the cephalic region if there is a little blood from the wound, and place the dressing opposite to the injured part; prevent the patient's repletion of wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If he does not wish to fast, his food should be reduced and he should drink no wine or meat, and place it on the wound, if an abscess comes there, apply cotton moistened with oil only or in vinegar solution; and if there is no abscess, apply it on the fresh wound with all its blood supply, provided it has not moved due to air or dust. Then he should apply some ointment until it is healthy again, or as I will say a little later; and if it moves, apply the ointment until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's handle and resembling such, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sutures, as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed bone, and wide open, barely held together by some flesh; then treat the wound with medicines, and replace hardened leather in its place, and instruct the patient to eat substantial meats like those tested and cooked wheat, as well as similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 If you find a worm or maggot without touching the bone, remove all of it and apply hot water, then treat; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein which cannot be stopped without tying, do your best to tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, fix with a thread; and if nothing works, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: you should apply this powder which dries as soon as the heat has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and make a fine powder, apply to the wound, securely bandage it until it dries thoroughly and reconnects with all its own flesh; then wrap it well, leaving no loose ends unless it swells. Do not remove the medication until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	et;l fid que est so faire let.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the wound is moved, especially in this way, do not use this powder at all; instead, apply some digested ointments or ground barley flour mixed with water and honey until it congeals; then treat with other remedebut only as long as it remains healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 If there is a fractured bone with the wound, and it is small, extract it using subtle pinceries; and I will tell you about fractures to the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no distinction between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, and there is no other remedy but to leave the wound alone, do not apply anything restrictive, as it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; also don't put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicine made similarly like warm water mixed with honey, melted with rose oil, and boiled in such water, and other herbs according to this method, along with moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	the f:
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, puncture or incise lower down; and if the artery is severed, stop the bleeding, ligate, and cauterize as necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut or teeth lost, causing food to shift, then adjust the jaw according to its natural position; then tighten it again, leave for several days, then treat with medicinal ointments until healed; and if the wound compressed a bone, extract it as needed; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, leaving those you cannot, until the wound closes and heals; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder over the previously mentioned powder.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone and a fistula in the wound, treat it thus as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, look to see if air leaks out as it emanates from the injury causing the patient great pain; then you know that the wound is deadly; but if it's not deep and the entire blood supply is fresh, do not apply powder at the first hour or bind with a bandage so the blood does not flow out in large amounts and return to the body, and blind the patient; instead, apply an attracting ointment and bind twice a day; if you have no ointnent, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on their back over the wound for three days or four or more; spasms, body tremors, or dislocations will not occur; and when you see healthy signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat with bandages and other treatments until healed; and if it cannot be healed or worked on, then suspect that there is an anal fistula; proceed with treatment as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is a sword or knife incision, and it's simple, or larger or on the back, treat this in front; if large, with bandages; if small, with powder, and if embedded in bone, and several pieces are needed to remove the wound, and the iron fragments if they need to be extracted; and if not, let the wound heal naturally and ease extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The second disruption of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The collapses of the belly are large and medium-sized and small; from a great wound never once do the intestines fall or their nerves, allowing for entry; and suturing is more difficult, and it's worse with a smaller wound than a larger one because when resetting the intestines there are fewer pulls needed if not done very hot to hot; because the intestines swell almost immediately upon feeling cold, they retract more easily, and hence why a minor injury is moved more than a major one as you suture them in place. And know that the treatment of the belly wound occurs in four ways: the common stitches happen on the abdomabdomen wound, and the stitches from other body injuries and two specific types are common with other wounds; however, they're always more appropriate for the abdominal wound, and I will explain each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and nothing of the intestines is torn, there are few things to be put back in place, either by the nature of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm the area in one way: moisten an absorbent sponge or use wet linen lightly, or immerse in hot water and soap and salt, and raise the intestine until swelling is reduced; do not make this too restrictive, as loosening helps to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when the swelling subsides, moisten the intortine with hot or cold water, as this helps to dilate the opening; and if nothing can pass through, gently create a hole using an instrument for treating bunions; the first treatment is to enlarge the incision without great necessity or need, which serves as dilation: cutting inside in the corrugated area but not too deep, observing its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is expanded and the intestines burst outward, if you can put them back in their natural place properly, do so if possible, because it will heal.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is large and it's located below the belly, it's appropriate to lay the patient on their back with legs raised higher than the head; and if it's under the belly, raise the head and hips higher than that area, and similarly for stitching around the belly in either of the two areas, make sure the sewn part is raised higher. That's how you should treat large and medium-sized wounds as I have described.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, prepare as follows: have two ministers who can sew the edges together; it's common practice for sutures and depending on the size of the wound, you will need a certain number of stitches. Leave space from the head of the wound with I inch between each stitch, using an appropriate needle or multiple ones; then pierce both edges of the skin with the same thickness as those beneath the skin and sew them together until complete, pulling double thread through the needle's eye. For sutures that are more than one palm wide, leave space between each stitch in such a way you have assembled all parts; then pull a double thread around two needles, and promptly stitch the wound edges as soon as you finish with one needle. Continue this until the entire wound is closed with sutures of medium thickness—neither too fine nor too coarse, as very fine ones might not penetrate properly, while too coarse may not close well; hence they should be of medium thickeinse: do not place stitches too far from the wound and skin surface that they don't adequately seal or support it. Then tie off each suture so as to avoid discomfort when the patient sleeps, cover with gauze or fabric over the sutures for comfort until fully healed; this method using medium-thickness sutures is better suited for small wounds. Another common way of stitching involves connecting both sides of the skin and underlying tissue to a single needle with medium thread thickness—after piercing all four layers together, reinsert the needle back at its starting point following how fabrics are sewn; leave space between each suture equal to one minor unit. This is known as stitching for people; I've performed this on a man whose abdomen was injured by a knife wound measuring more than one palm in width, and the intestines were protruded outward about two palms wide, with the injury located within his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned his intestines since it had been fourteen hours, and the wound was sutured up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the master thought he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment as there were none to be found in this place or any medicines; instead, I placed twice-aged cotton over the wound each day, and bathed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and thread it through to the depth just mentioned; when it pierces the flesh straight from left to right, remove the suture or where you inserted the needle, and then thread it back from within outward as far as specified; thus, the concept of this suturing is like that of a tailor making seams, leaving once the skin unstitched on one side and re-threading from another until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second manner of suture, as Galien describes it properly, is such that anyone does, joining the two parts together naturally and placing one end of the membrane to the other, in this way: insert a needle or thread next to the mucous membrane, make an incision at only that location, leaving both ends of the membrane; then turn the needle, and make another incision from the part forward until reaching inside where there are two more ends of the mucous membrane; then pierce one and the other up to the part forward in two additional places of the membrane which are on opposite sides. This is the manner of suturing most commonly used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galen states this word and no one denies it, that the belly should be sewn with two needles, each having thread; and place one needle on one side, and the other on the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps; so that when there is a rupture within the belly, then this suture is more challenging than others involving parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The assessment of the wound is such as with other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound fully bleeding, just as if the arrow had moved it, reset the intestines and the belly; then apply powdered charcoal ointment, and if the arrow has moved, apply any present poultice until the wound hardens; trim the thread, tie securely with silk and linen; then treat the wound as others, until it is sound; and if you have no medicines, apply a ball of cotton at first when it begins to bleed lightly, two times a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You don't need any other medicine in certain cases where wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal limbs, then you should gently rub linen with lukew groggy oil or rose oil between your hands, and place it near the joints and under the elbows; and if they feel pain or swelling in the belly, which happens often, then administer a black wine enema, especially if the swelling reaches up to the intestines; and probe inside, noting that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is afflicted, and this is because of the poison from wounds that are present, and due to the subtlety of the entire body and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 If the sinew springs from the wound, reset it like an intestine while still fresh; if it is old and turned yellow or black, then remove the dark area to prevent bleeding due to veins and arteries; next bind what lies between the ligaments, and hang two heads of leeches from below the injury site until extraction when the sinew slips out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	be it comes as f not cane them a lign bette a le :th d’s li;
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine protrudes and the wound is small, it can be restored in certain cases as I have seen a man was stabbed with a lance; the wound was on the right side of the abdamen, becoming hollowed out and turning into a fistula causing egestion and flatulence; according to what I could do, I provided care and did not cease delicate procedures until healed, and the sinew closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 When I saw it joined up, I doubted that the patient might have harm in his stomach; and there was no harm at all, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound inside the intestine, it should be treated this way: take frog's gall from large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and once the frog's gall has opened its mouth, place it over the two lips so that it stretches out; and then cover its head, ensuring it does not come apart, then put another frog's gall afterward in the same manner until the entire wound is closed; and heal the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 In the intestine, it swells without harm to the patient, and you can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal: take the end of this thread of intestine that is quite cleaned, then bind it to the end of a subtle linen thread, put the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine in such a manner; this method of suturing from within is no further than according to trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the corners of the intestines, there is no remedy or health, save for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it exists
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess, when it ages, is generally called "fistula," especially if it oozes and heals with scars.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is caused by improper blood flow and pus, without pain, and healing like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it weeps clear pus, other times thick; occasionally little, at other times enough; and I have discussed in the section on wounds, that any unhealed wound does not close naturally, except due to one of the nine causes: namely, because of too much blood or body heat; or its inherent badness; or hardening inside with swelling above the edges preventing exudate from escaping; or excessive pus; or the flesh being rotten and of poor quality; or inappropriate medication for treatment; or due to decay as a form of plague; or because digestion is slow, recovery is delayed by nature; or presence of tumors or bone fragments: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and remedies using medicines.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of an abscess made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistules that arise from great veins and arteries, and nerves, or at the liver, or intestine, or bladder, or to certain ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet; and they also occur in the principal member and its counterparts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All such types of fistulas have a serious prognosis and only involve labor and ignorance; if there is any type of faster that does not reach the extent I mentioned, but you trust in its healing, and it appears to be healed, then take an awning made of wicker or iron, depending on whether the fistula is straight or twisted, as the planks can bend around a subtle tension; if the fistula has exposed openings that cannot be accurately examined using tenting techniques, use a clisterization from one of its openings to cleanse it because moisture dissipates quickly from one opening to another and cleanses it. Then firmly grasp it with your strength as you can determine if there is bone or nerve, and whether it swells completely; ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where it is felt; once you have accurately identified its location, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the locations I mentioned, then treat according to what I've said, removing impurities within. Then continue curing until fully healed, and if the fistula has penetrated deeply in its proper location, you should cauterize it entirely where possible, after which apply bandages soaked with medicinal ague up to the head of the fistule, as long as they corrode the superfluity at the bottom; then apply healing balm ointments until fully healed. If not by this means, cauterize it as we have said, and if bone is corrupted within the fistula, excise it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If veins or nerves are affected or principal limbs; as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, so rule until the decay has consumed all the bone, then treat various things gently until it becomes healthy; and if not healed, return to bowing as before, knowing you should not go near fire: expose and wait until reaching the bottom, remove all decay, then restore its place; and if thus it is made healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the decay is too extensive to approach; there is no other remedy than latchets of nature; and if there are small corrupted bones, you can extract them with pincers using a suitable instrument for such, and if there are many bangs, pull out all except one; and if moisture acts against it, and there is neither mistake nor fear, apply compresses, moisture, and heat, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 If you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that causes putrefaction to the wound and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones; then the bones will be more easily released; and if it's a large bone like from the leg or thigh, completely cover the corruption until all the bone has decayed, then close the wound; and if there is a significant part of the bone affected by corruption, reaching nearly to the marrow, you must entirely encase it up to the point of corruption, then cure until solidified; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one man's leg, from which you can take example and aid for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Once there was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came inside the body until substances reached the leg and fled from a large abscess, but without any apparent reason to open it; however, by their folly doctors worked so much on it that they opened the abscesses, and there were consumed many materials, which became fistulas, and there was excessive moisture in all parts of the body; several physicians attempted treatment for two years without any success in the art of healing by hands, until I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him, as well as what flowed through the fistulas to a large part of the body; consequently, the young man's body turned red, and it had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I erected a tent on one of these points, and then searched for all the points, finding that each comes in contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Therefore I proceeded and cut into one of the points as far as I discovered a part of the bone, finding it corroded and pierced, with corrosion reaching to the inner bone; I perceived what seemed to be from the corroded bone, assuming there was no other corruption apart from that which I showed; so I began treating the wound with medicinal plasters over a long time, but could not sew it up; and then I resumed treatment, discovering the bone as before, finding continuous corrosion in the bebone, which I treated, and then removed it, and tried to suture at the location. However, I was unable to cut around the entire bone with just a span of my hand, causing the plaster to fail entirely; so I restored it again with medicines. It quickly healed and sewed up promptly, without having to restart treatment except due to the patient's weakness who could not bear it, and from fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood often made him faint, but he recovered completely, and in place of the bone there grew a hard callus, which was well-formed and had no detriment or disadvantage at all, neither to walking nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated as follows: take a line, and straighten the head of the broken bone that protrudes, and command no one to move it upwards; and put another thicker piece of cloth on the first line, and tie it over the callus on the bone, and pull the ends so that you tear away the rotten callus from below, and expose the healthy callus at the place where you want to heal, ensuring that nothing touches the callus; and put a tine or a piece of wood under the bone to support the rotten callus; and it must be treated until one can see and feel the corruption has been removed, and then treat it again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the midst or in a part, reveal the entire wound; then apply fire from above, and then proceed with heating from one part to another the corruption, and let it be longer than half of the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and remove the bone or what contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy than doubling up; and if the corruption is at the end of the hand or foot, that matter is very strong, but nevertheless one must investigate how that corrosion opens to you, clean it with all possible means without causing irritation to the vein or nerve; and know that incising instruments and probes for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, their size and smallness, and hardness; therefore it must be equipped with an instrument suited to each kind of work. And know that the craft will show you which tool you need, in accordance with knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways diseases manifest themselves; so ponder upon the instrument needed according to what is fitting.
dou feu	If by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may rot or perish due to internal causes, or lack thereof; and when you have administered the medicine for this decay through medicinal treatment, but they prove ineffective, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the decay occurs so that the patient escapes death's embrace or its greater harm from the member's deficiency; and signs are such that the limb turns black as if scorched by fire, followed by the blackness of rotting of limb to limb, taking over the entire body. Act quickly with covering; and if it is due to the sting of venomous creatures like sea scorpions, snakes, etc., and decay occurs at the head of the joints, cover up but do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it reaches the hand, cover the joint, ensuring that corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cover the elbow; and if it passes the elcuote, there is death, with no remedy except in relation to its effectiveness; and thus, whenever corrosion occurs or strikes: if it reaches the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it strikes a limb, then cover the entire limb; and if it ascends to the leg, cover at the knee joint; and if it surpasses the knee, there is no other remedy than to make the patient faint; the manner of applying or removing bandages should be such that you bind above and below, extending a mittin between the straps on one side, and another mitten on the opposite strap, then untie the cord which lies between the two straps wide enough so that the bone is exposed; then apply the cast or bandage, and place linen strips from each side, ensuring that the bandage does not touch the healthy area, causing further injury to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 When the flow of blood changes while you work, promptly perform a cauterization at the site or apply certain restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with an obligatory bandage and treat it until healthy again; and I will tell you what happened to a man in deep sleep: a blackness resembling fire burned him first on his thumbs down to the fingers, spreading throughout the entire finger; when the man saw the corrosion, he cauterized the wound with copper and was healthy again; after many years it returned to his elbow, then came to me, and I applied things that cause reactions after body cleansing, but could not stop the corrosions; so I bandaged his hand, unsure if there was hope of spreading the material; also doubted whether cutting his hand would kill him, for the vitality of the man was weak; he became desperate and returned to his homeland, cauterizing his hand himself and recovered.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 At no time does an abscess come to a hardened state, and it lingers so long that it forms a large mass of pus; and then bursts and drains, and the fat flows out, and the eyelids remain swollen like lambskin; and the skin above is as subtle as cut cloth, not reaching even to the bone or nerve, thus these illnesses are called "healed", not "fistula"; but if it becomes so large that it reaches near the bone fully, then it is called a "faster". The flesh should be excised completely around that area of skin; especially when it's as delicate as cut cloth.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If you believe the skin is hardened and not entirely rotten, and the skin is thick like leather, then this cure of an enema: check if the chest is large, and the bow that lies therein is foul-smelling odor; thus, enema with Egyptian medicine prepared as follows: take ease, oil, and litargyrion equally, and cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take of it according to your need, and mix with water and hunter, enema the chest, and strain out the excrement; leave the medicine within for two hours, then extract by squeezing; do this many times until the chest is restored and the pus comes out; at no time are you to use an enema of simply water from ashes, unless this Egyptian medicine is not present. Instead, take ash from grapevine wood, add water above it, then pour through, and for an enema until you know that the chest has been restored properly; if the patient cannot bear either the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, do an enema with water and honey mixed in a little amount of litargyrion. Alternatively, use millefiori wine and honey for this purpose, because honey cleanses and wine purifies blood; first, ensure that the chest is properly restored before using any medicine or technique to bring out secretions.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is fully formed, do not allow it to bend without covering its back; and if you cannot cover the chest from below as you see fit, adjust in such a manner that the bow points towards the lowest point where it can be found, for when the bow is fully formed, do not allow it to bend without covering its back and if you cannot cover the chebt from below as you see fit, adjust accordingly: so that the bow moves slightly downward, and nothing impedes the bow; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and extend over a linen bandage that covers the entire area; then cover the wounded spot with strengthening forces using another cloth according to the amount of the puncture, and place it on the puncture in the chest to support the bow, and do not remove the large bandage until after many days once; and those who are under the punctured part of the chest often remove it to alleviate the bending of the bow, and know if anything flows from the bow, whether it's poison or a small amount or sufficient, digested or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way that you see the nature of what rises from under the puncture on the chest, you know that the chest will heal soon, and approach health; then release it in the morning or after three days, and when you open the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become badly bruised after many days, it is said that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if you encounter subtle chords after long periods of time, do not despair over health, for healing is nearing.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are those who delay healing in their wounds, and some do the opposite; if an indigestible swelling occurs within the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not enlarge much; if they delay from growing, it is due to prolonged neglect, so apply medicines made of moist substances with dry qualities as a finished ointcuits like diaphinites because there is a large component of vitriol in them, which are considered the last medicine. Take diafinites and mix them with rose oil; then blend it evenly with old wine in terms of substance but fresh in virtue; afterwards, heat it and apply it. The same can be done with honey-cooked fat, when diafinites are not available or present, take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them, and powder over the honey as you place it on the fire; then wrap in a piece of cloth and apply to the breast for no long time, without using aromatic ointments or treating with celestial lily roots, which are similar to fine flour or bran. Use simple or compound mixtures: grind them, make into powder, add honey as mentioned earlier, and use it; if the treatment is extensive but not cured by this method, know that corruption has set in deeply, pressing on bones, hardened members, or ligaments; then proceed with the treatment for fistulas as we have previously described.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or sometimes occurs in other joints; and when it matures, and no precautions are taken, so comes about an abscess which expands, and runs and oozes pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance may consume the entire nail; leading to bone erosions up to the bone, causing intense pain, with swollen joints, and discoloration.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 If you treat it as we have described in the section, and if treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cut off all excess tissue associated with the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caustic is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is uninfected; and if the nail touches the skin, begins to hurt, and swells, then you must place a splint underneath the nail so it does not press against the skin, lift it upwards, and delicately remove the subtle tissue, and apply upon the remainder medicines that burn and are corrosive to eliminate all; then treat with ointments until they are healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it and treat severely, as much as the bone corrupts, it cannot heal; and if you see the joint deteriorating, remove it as previously mentioned, then treat until it is healed; if it becomes severe, boils, and causes great pain, first alleviate the pain; then cut the nail with a small saw across from below, but be careful that the cut does not reach the skin beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this occurs, apply something to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of soreness arises from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocations that occur in the shoulders of some men by chance are all fleshly, and sometimes they have bones, and at other times there is no knuckle, and none of them grow in the root of the joint where the growth occurs in certain cases.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one that occurs in any of our shoulder does not move, and the one that occurs at the joint of the shoulder sometimes moves; the stature of the fleshly ones is somewhat lightweight: lengthen it at its root with a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat: take hold with your spatula.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one that occurs or forms on our next shoulder, it is necessary to first remove the roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and heal until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The tendency that comes with age may arise from birth, or by sudden wound healing, or by scalding with fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to deal with that swelling, ensure the wound heals according to its natural shape; then place between two tents or cloths soaked in oil of roses, ensuring they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine plaster, until the joint is fused, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If attentively considering any of his legs with the palm, cover them as needed according to necessity.
des vils	 Of evil things
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 There are large boils swollen with excessive melancholy that appear on various body parts; and more often occur in the legs of those who go to church and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Then it is necessary for you to administer a purging of colic once, and then wash the area with holy water from the chalice.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is in two ways: one way is to cut them and drain the black blood; the other way is to open the vein and bleed it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The body is thus treated in this manner: raise the first leg with hot water strong enough to make it swell, then stretch the leg gently from above the hip down to the area below the knee; then tie off the vein at one location, either one, two or three times, making a wide cut; extract and squeeze out black blood by hand from top to bottom as much as the virtue of the sick person can bear; then bind it up, and instruct them to eat preserved meat with black pudding; resume evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, causing no discomfort to the ill.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The procedures are as follows: raise the ill leg, if it has much hair, then put in a bath and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; if there is no bath available, warm it by fire instead, then tie off the long vein from head to knee or above the ankle; work on the skin at the edge of the incision, and peel the vein from both sides until you feel it when touched; and it appears red and black, looking like a white string; then pour hot water over it, raising the flesh layer, and then loosely tie another tourniquet above, followed by making another incision at about three inches upward. Then peel the skin from the vein until you feel it, just as before, and lift it with thread likewise; after that, make another incision near the other ankle. Once everything is lifted off completely, bandage, repeat for all necessary incisions, then cleanse the area using a mixture of wine and oil linen.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 If the vein is twisted and coiled together and not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not sever; it covers the vein. And it has a large curve because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein, but it must be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 Of civil blood
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is located in the legs, warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry ground; sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which occurs due to rot that comes from under the skin like how it arises within the body's serpents and wrinkles, entwined between the hide and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it comes to the leg as a great inflammation, then the vein changes course and begins to protrude outward like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head opens, it must be wrapped in a piece of linen from 1 to 2 inches until fully covered, and also the nose and leaving the linen on the leg, wrapping around every time when there is no more adhesion, then wrap again inside the linen and nose; if it is too long, cut off part of it, and rewrap what remains, but do not cover it completely at its root until it is fully extruded because if you cover it, it will retreat into the hole, causing an abscess and rotting or infection there, which brings about a bad illness; therefore, this vein must be treated little by little until finished, leaving nothing inside nor outside; and sometimes this vein when treated with 5 inches of linen or more, but one man came to me from whom it had come out for 10 fingers' length, and when you cover it, three arrows or darts are released, piercing it all the way until emptying. It is then emptied of its matter which is inside and cleansed with medicinal poultices every day to heal like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And at no time should you touch this vein with your hands, especially when it is opened in the joint of a toe or finger, and from there comes much pus, causing swelling; therefore treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Of worms that emerge between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it often occurs within the veins and consists of small worms that emerge between skin and flesh, spreading throughout the body upward and downward, causing discomfort from limb to limeright until they rupture the skin where they go; it is accompanied by putrefaction of various humors, as snakes, earthworms, and roundworms or witches come near. Doubt arises about its nature because when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, sometimes it enters the ear and exits, causing damage; this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being drained and pulled, one cannot force it when moving: therefore, it must be tied above and below a strong ligament tightly, then cut around and along the bone, ensuring there is no blood flow to the area, if not achieved, cauterize with fire until it stops; the greatest harm it causes is that fluids may run out as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, tightly pinch above it, then cut around, and along the bone; one must use purifying medicines for dissolving bodily humors to treat the patient, and wash with putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain arising from windwounding (referring to injury caused by exposure to cold, d
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This illness is called in our land "vakkir", and it brings pain to certain limbs, and then moves from one limb to another; and I have witnessed what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to see a sick woman, and found her with swollen arms, and I saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm; and shortly afterward, I noticed it rising as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, like silver being cut from one place to another; the pain moved away from its location, embedding itself into the shoulder, then running through the entire body until it reached the other arm; she told me that it returned around her body, just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	And it not moved by all le peignee les maint lits a l'eau; Et heal the sains: si li ou vous doit seintelle de ce il la, comme merite pendre et ne quitte avec le bail, and herboutre temps du que parle en couché est sois it pour mouche les maintes d’aposte la l'oeil a sains qui elle sur la fuit tout, si ce de ce telle the ou il te merite. And heu: li, thene au se eau de oinz et saie; and of le couvre dans the c.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Nevertheless, I have always wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I could not see it in the woman; and I thought it was because she had dry skin, with veins exposed, and for this reason appeared constrained hysteria; and not evident is such a cause in those who are delirious, and have moist skin and closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain if it opens up as we have said, then quickly lay above and below hastily, and afterward cover until constrained hysteria reaches its peak; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your eyes, heal as for those who rest hysteria, like foul pills, and serpentine pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	 Of arrow extractions
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearances and where they enter the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The various types of arrows have some with large points and others small; those with feathered fletchings and barbs; those with two angles and tines; and that which splits into pieces. It enters a limb in one of the two ways: either through the principal member, as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, or similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it enters any part of these limbs, the signs of death that I will tell you about next become apparent: it is necessary to extract this arrowhead because death may follow in various ways; and if this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then track (the animal) and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow enters and pierces the bone is that it bursts near the skull, causing darkness, sadness, exhaustion, and reddening in all eyes; as well as inflammation and reddening of the tongue, spasms and disturbances of understanding, and vomiting bile. And sometimes there may be no fever from the nose or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and water leaks like white hair turning blue; and from such a wound appears moisture similar to bruising in flesh; and if these signs appear, proceed with treatment, and extract the arrow if not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it pierces or goes through the body is that it's close to the left breast and feels as though it has been lodged in a hard object, not hollow; and perhaps the arrow moves like hair growing, with black blood, and comes cold sweat, fainting, leading one to have doubts about death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The arrowhead's sign is that the hole never closes and exudes pus from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead pierces into the muscle layer, it is near the ribs; and exudes a lot of blood and great pain and breathing; and moves all limbs around the shoulder blades.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead pierces into the abdabdominal cavity, sometimes it does not cause any damage to the unripened meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrow falls into the belly and does not exit through the bowels with a gush of wind, there is no hope for the remedy or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine does not pass while flowing out freely, and the patient feels strong pain: believe that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as it is made and the neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and ribs and thighs and legs, and limbs appearing similar, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a vein or an artery and it's not poisonous as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to some people that an arrow struck the root of their neck first: I tried it, and from under the ear fat on the other side, it was made well without needing anything.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And with one shot an arrow that pierced the fat of the eye under the paper below, and the arrow was repositioned, only its tip reached his foot, and it was a large Turkish bow without any ears; the wound healed, and no further complications occurred to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And I shot an arrow to the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears; I removed the scales, and carefully managed until it was shot; the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And the arrow to a part of the body, which was lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die; but after it had been there for thirty days, no change occurred in his condition; I cut near the arrow, manipulated it, pulled it through, and nothing went wrong.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if the arrow falls on a person's back and there is a swolebreak over it; and the arrow remains inside him, without changing his natural conditions or causing harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And another man on whom an arrow fell on his face with a swollen wound; it remained there causing much pain and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And I removed an arrow from a person of royalty, lodged in the middle part, slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was fully embedded, so I was summoned for treatment after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 He tried with all subtlety, and did not feel it; yet he felt twisting and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead. I placed a poultice with anti-inflammatory properties because his eyes were swoln; and to me, it seemed as if I saw the arrowhead's shaft.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I removed the poultice after a while and allowed the wound to bleed more fully, so that the patient rested long times until he felt the arrow in his brain; and it told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied corrosive ague medicine to the wound until it opened up, and tried it, feeling the top of the arrowhead coming loose at its place; then I approached the opening with the same medicine ague so that the head of the arrow became clearly visible to me; and after a little over four months, it pierced out completely, and then I widened the hole on both sides, but it could not come out. So then I stopped being subtle and began devising ways of leechcraft, until one day, with well-fitted forceps, according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, I extracted it by twisting and left the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will restore it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was fully cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 Or have I told you about the quality of arrow extraction; place your care on what I did not mention, for the book cannot cover everything; but wise masters comprehend very little, and they focus on what is present and failing, performing nine works with nine instruments, dealing with strange matters that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows are fixed into members in two ways: directly where they enter or from another direction; and the one that protrudes at the point of entry is an arrow passing through fleshly tissues, and it will never exit again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not slide now, let it rest until the joint is fully released and freed; if it is wedged in the bone and cannot come out, allow time each day, adjusting a little each day; then it will slide, and if it still does not slide, pierce around carefully with a very fine tool until the space within the joint is widened, then proceed.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is embedded in the skull near one of the brain's cavities, and some of the incidents I have openly mentioned to the patient: do not extract it immediately, but let it rest until it becomes level after several days, for if the arrowhead reaches this area, it means death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrow is lodged solefly in the bone and does not reach the joint, and the patient remains for several days without apparent harm, then attempt to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very firm and cannot be removed easily, then apply poultices around it as I have told you; then heal the wound until it becomes healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrow is re-inserted into its place and cannot be seen, then probe thoroughly; if you feel it, draw with any suitable instrument; and if not possible by widening the wound or deepening to find bone, nerve, or vein, explore as long as necessary until the location becomes clear. Extract the arrow if visible, and if there are ears on the arrow that hold it in place, break off the part of the object that is fused from two sides where you can feel; then snap or bend the ears of the arrow to facilitate extraction, being careful not to break the arrow as this would make removal more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	the c. (Ct; asper quo and le t, so far, but there.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the bleeding progresses contrary to us, treat it as we have described in its chapter; and beware of cutting nerves or veins, and apply techniques so that you may extract the arrowhead without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to their form when the arrow fell upon them, for this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, position it as the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 If the arrow comes from another part, or reveals any opening, or if you can see or feel swelling at that spot: then cut there accordingly as far as the pincers can grasp it, and then extract it; if it protrudes strongly now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, rotate your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, then leave it for now and begin the extraction again until it is possible; and if the arrowhead is in there, place the entire thing [the arrow] back in its position; and if it comes loose, administer bandaging as needed, so insert a suitable instrument whose point goes into the hole of the instrument; then push harder, and if the arrowhead is fully inserted, use an instrument with a pointed end to aid in extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as required.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead falls or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, cut around it if possible, then extract it; but be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then remove it, then bandage the wound as needed; care for it until healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	f; t.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the arrowhead is also like the beak of a bird, to point at the tip of the arrowhead, as described here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of pincers for pushing and pulling is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	yt.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The number of veins one can see are thirty-one in total: sixteen on the head, which includes: two hammer veins behind the ears called "herbek", two visible arteries in each temple, two veins within both eyelids named "aspiers", a vein between the brows, a vein underne.e., and the two jugular veins located at the neck; as well as two veins on either side of the lips above the mouth called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins which are commonly bled in each arm: the one is cephalic, and is on the left side of the neck, and they call it by folk "vein of the head"; and the other is called 'fast' [blood vessel], and is composed of cephalic and basilic, and they call it by folk "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side of the neck, and they call it by folk "vein of the abdomen", and is beneath the collarbone, and that is the vein which is bled, clearly visible above the crook.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the salvatic vein is the vein that lies between the little finger and ring finger, with two branches; in the leg where there are three veins: one below the hollow of the neck on the left side, the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'Nesse', located at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The sickness of the veins that are after the ears aids ancient catarrhs and migraines; and its quality is as I tell you, and it is to raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with rough cloth; then tighten the collar on them using a rope until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the top of the skull: do this at your discretion, and wherever you feel hairs growing under your thumb, cut away; then take a lancet, and push it through below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein towards yourself, and scrape off the skin and vein well two times in the track, and let blood flow until you see enough; then compress and tie, until it is healed; and I have already mentioned the incision and cautery as in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The vein of the two arteries that are in both temples should be treated with an old method: gentle pulling and massaging, along with tears for relief; and the quality of this treatment is as I describe: the patient must extend their neck until the veins become clearly visible; they feel throbbing behind the ears, then pressure; then lift the head slightly above the index finger's position, and place the lancet below it, draw out the blood from above, and extract the vein upwards as you have done with other veins before, adjusting bleeding according to need; afterwards release the patient, and let the neck rest for an hour on a cotton pad, then bandage firmly until healed; of which we have discussed in detail concerning their initiation and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The surgery of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the surgery for cranial diseases of old facial conditions, and migraines, and redness; and its nature is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "sinker," which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the tip above the vein, and aim with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is straight and not wrinkled by a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it should not be that the clamp is too tight or twisted; and the suture line, because the bone is close by, and occasionally breaking the clamp when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The surgery for the two veins that are in the eyelids helps with swelling, and itching, redness, eye pain, and facial diseases; its nature is such that the patient twists his neck without any ligament as before; then cut, leaving a long strip of skin slightly wider than usual because there is no scar.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flesh is delicate and may break easily; then do careful cauterization of blood, as much as you need it, and afterwards apply a poultice, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The pus from the vein is of two colors, and it can be thick or thin, and caused by facial diseases such as migraines and inflammation that come upon the face, especially when it is longstanding; and the quality of the pus is such that the patient strains his neck, then stretches out his nose to your left hand, and takes a fine, long thread, and inserts it halfway into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and the blood will begin to flow immediately; and do not pull too far apart, and allow the blood to clot according to your need, then bind it overnight, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the thread.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The ointment of the two pigeon's glands aids in extending the alaunite, and at the beginning of leeching, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and erythematosus; and the quality of the ointment is such that the patient must remove his collar from under both ends, as we have said; and it should be applied to the master standing over the head of the patient, who then squeezes out a bit of blood for some time, then lets up until necessary; then repeat on the other vein, relieving the liens evenly, so that the patient does not strain. Leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of liver disease
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Healing of ulcers on the lips above helps with coalescing in the mouth and gum decay, as well as lip cracks, swelling, and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of liver disease is to have the patient sit before you and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, recognizing them by being black and having small dark spots around them: pluck both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, remove the largest from each side, and similarly with all above and below, because they are of the same kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 concerning liver disease from under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Liver disease from the veins that are under the tongue follows headache treatment, and it is at throat stretching, and eye diseases, and mouth illnesses; the quality of liver cleansing is such that the patient should cut between your hands in front of the sunlight, and lift the tongue, and look under each side for a black vein: cleanse both, but do not go too deep, as those are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins of the bone which are commonly incised in accordance with two methods: by gripping at any flared part, or with a slender olive branch like sharp scissors, and called "anesil"; and they are wide and slender according to the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the deadly mistletoe is very famous, and it's wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open plain-haired veins containing abundant and turbid blood, and this is the form of the slender olive branch.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is finer pointed, and used for balancing subtle veins, where there is a subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The incision of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and collarbone, and groin, and abdomen; thus it behooves the physician to make a careful incision, and he must wash from the artery situated above.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it must be sealed as I have said; but the flap should not be grasped tightly, but folded as needed.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it must be extracted and replaced with another; or you wish to tie off its ends, or bring it up near the elbow of the arm: it opens clearly; and cut the flap as needed, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you recognize the source of the vessel, then it must be drained and the arm removed until you know when to stop; then mark the point where bleeding stops, then bind the wound, and cut the vein with the flap as needed; and beware not to injure the artery when you see the site swelling, for it is an artery: avoid this.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you see it protruding upwards like a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger underneath for a long time, then if the vein disappears, many times this happens; when the arm is left thusly, do not move it at all while in fear until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	thembo.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a slice of fitch, and split it, and take one half and place it until the next day; if the vein remains constricted, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said with powders that coagulate blood; and the inflammation may vary in different locations near the small area of the wound, and the strength of the bone joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein being milked helps it to draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of both basilar and cephalic parts, as we have said; thus, the cauterizer should warm up due to the nerve underneath, and if it becomes too full, then you find the nerve, which swells and turns pale, sometimes unable to heal; this nerve opens many times, and if in no man by its subtlety, it must be searched for with an instrument called anoscope; and withdraw the nerve within your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they are deeply cut.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The cephalic vein helps by drawing blood from the head and aids in healing; one should cauterize at touching the olivaire or mirtine fossa because it is the most beneficial of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Always seek the easier place to reset, and do not strain anything if it is the first time, and start over; and in some cases, the joint swells in certain men when it must be done for the first time, but do not strain them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about fasting is that it's only undertaken to maintain health and avoid future illnesses; and there are three ways to fast: cerebral, physical, and spiritual; and one should begin fasting at the beginning of a feast day, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and one should fast for the first day or two days after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The treatment of illnesses does not have a fixed time, but it should be done when needed, at any hour and always; and it is not necessary to treat children up to fourteen years old or women who are seven months pregnant.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not attempt to heal old men who have passed sixteen years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 The method of healing should involve cleansing the intestines with a light enema if there is much feces retained or if the veins do not carry away excessive fluids that can harm essential orgamen; one should not treat those who are too weak from food, drunkenness, and so on, nor after colic attack, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent defecation in women, fatigue, sexual intercourse, or any such things. Then the humors must be subtly drained if one is overweight through diet, drinks, and medicines; then take a bath unless anything prevents it to help drain blood, and cleanse the veins under the armpit as we have said; avoid work on that day along with physical strain, sexual activity, or similar things. Be mindful and joyful, and let healers perform higher than those they treat, rubbing their arms twice or thrice, then gently separate the ligaments in the middle for proper cleansing because if it is too tight or sparse, it cannot be done properly; afterward, rubbed with oil on hands until veins swell and are felt, then apply a small amount of olive oil using their left hand over that vein where they want to cleanse, making sure the vein does not burst upon touch.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee like cords in a harp, and some have openings for wind-like drafts; so when placed over the flame, they retract into themselves without opening the vein, thus these cases arise; and if the vein is opened, it becomes an excessively narrow wound, therefore one must be mindful of such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	s and d. So, so that he at the first one'I: to be on-brolem
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the limb is swollen and the patient hopes to heal, let him rest for a day or two without binding the arm: lest abscesses may arise therein; do not bathe it yet resume suturing if desired; and if the opening is small, or the artery subtly bleeds, doubt its amount of blood as seen, then confidently cauterize that specific opening with the flame entirely; and quickly close the wound a bit hastily so that the limb may swell; for this often occurs when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start reopening it again, and apply a little oil, for it eases their pained body and becomes fluid in that place with the oil; so administer the oil mixture on each vein you find, to stop the blood flow; and likewise use triacle and bowl of ointment when placed on the joint; but be cautious as it separates and spreads if too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if a large abscess occurs, which happens many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small and you hasten it; apply a damp sponge soaked in warm water to the joint for an hour; then make this afterwards as soon as the blood from the vein subsides, and do not bother if there are any darkening or greening at the place after some days; but if you see anything, apply something of aloes or myrrh mixed with chamomile juice, musk, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance on the sinew of the basilica; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot tender to pressure from your hand, that is the evil appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be sure not to place anything as we have said upon it, for perhaps by chance on the artery; but provide a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And deal with each blood according to its amount and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, leave it to become thinner; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 For those who are plain and outside, and need blood extraction, make a wider wound, with wide gashes; for the weak ones, do the opposite, support them lightly and often, and adjust it by slicing across rather than poking; this way of support prevents excessive bleeding and nerve entanglement, and is better than long and wide supports.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For those whose body requires support, provide them with pounded bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are weakened, feed them this three or four times a day. If of a cold nature, give them before support, pounded bread in syrup or honeyed aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensnaring a pleasing odor.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it turns pale due to the loss of much blood, then you should make a purging mixture with char dust and fragrant syrup, and use other remedebefore described in the chapter on fainting for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if one wishes to drain the arms, and to bleed elsewhere at another time, it is necessary that when greatly swollen from much blood loss, they are bled little by little continuously according to the quantity of their virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	(1; and so and there the t't
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to heal another area, it must be tended to on the second day or sooner.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Because there is much blood within the body that has become overheated and fever ensues; if it is necessary to let out a great quantity of blood, and widen the orifice so it bleeds freely; then you should treat all conditions of paleness, and place your hand on the hair as soon as it returns to color, preventing death from occurr. This often occurs when those suffering have been neglectful; however, do not consider removing a limb if blood flows out for the second time, especially when the orifice is closed and you press firmly upon it; but if it is bulging, extend the arm quickly as that would be harmful; instead let it bleed another time. Do not use lemon at this point, until the blood flow has ceased from the vein opening, and apply a small amount of soaked bread to the area, gently pressing upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed again, let the blood be taken from the same place or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	li miau et unce it is d and so that li chiers comme nos espointe de ou heu, si que we have les oint the cure to done, s said braies avie l'Oul; et li nail the place doue de pne ce est.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The method for treating the illness is that the patient places their hand in hot water until the thread appears red; then it should be tied securely so the vein appears well-defined, then bleed through along its length, neither too wide nor too long; and the prick has a wide opening, and is properly positioned near the joint of the hand, without any risk of leakage. If there is still blood flowing, do not reapply hot water to the hand, as it becomes more effective in winter than summer; and this vein treatment is safer than all other methods, for it contains neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The vein of the thumb on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: stretch the hand, and put in hot water until the veins are flowing; if you see a transverse vein, and if you cover it completely throughout, nothing should hurt; and do not go too deep as nerves lie close to the surface of bone, then put the hand back in hot water, if the vein is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	as it;
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bone of the finger on the left hand is used for the illness of leprosy, and do as I have told you with the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The vein of the elbow is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as hip disease, urine retention, kidney disease, and old ailments of thighs and legs, among similar illnesse.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient should pour hot water on the vein until it softens and rubs over the joint by the foot, then bind above the joint with bandages; and the vein lies at the ankle, so many streams go from there or to the calf, making sure they are wide enough or around the ankle, allowing movement as needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse at the foot, watch out for veins that are underneath, and cleansing as in cutting through; let the swelling be reduced.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	:
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the treatment fails on the first try, begin again soon after at a slightly different spot above because the bone is swollen; do not doubt of nerves as we have said, and thus apply the splint to the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its treatment relates to the pain in the hip when it's inflamed with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient should bathe or soak and stretch above the aneckle with four fingers by twisting, otherwise it won't open the vein; if it opens, secure it in all possible ways you can, including wrapping across; make sure to cover it well because the bone is swoln, and it has risen significantly.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 If you cannot find it, wash any wound that opens or cuts through the skin and reaches to the small toe, and protect from nerves; and treat thoroughly with medicine until seen, and then tie off the vein, and place cotton on it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Of bandages for suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Poultices are made of horns, or wax, or glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by drawing blood with a lick, or without causing pain.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This suction technique has two methods: one is with intense heat, or without; and the other involves drawing blood and is done on fourteen points of the body - some at the top of the head, others in the neck region, others along both sides of the neck, under the chin, over each shoulder, over the hips, on both legs, and around both ankles. The suction method does not involve blood but rather small veins scattered within the vessel; therefore, one may use it without concern as with bandaging a vein, provided that it is appropriately managed and neither too hot nor lukewarm for any illness caused by fluid retention until all bodily fluids have been drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 If for necessity of diseases it is required to blow one's nose, or by habit, let us perform each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every now and then; for there are those who, when they need to blow their noses, have heavy heads; and some find fullness and redness in their face, forehead, and neck, along with darkness in their eyes; and others encounter a drop of blood in their mouth, and swol cuffs the tongue, causing bleeding; and there are those who think, see through blood-filled and painful and deadly and strange things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially in the month, we command to treat after 3 hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The blowing of the nose assists in relieving head pain ... which results from it, and it should not be done until all bodily fluids are evacuated; this nasal blowing is related to cephalic ailments, and one should only use it if they have a cold disposition or catarrh, as it causes them great harm; therefore, the vigilant should not practice it, nor those who have head colds.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who experience it often become disoriented, so placing the bladder slightly lower due to suspicion of misalignment is necessary.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventilation in the neck is at the level of the brain and base, and for this reason it involves stretching of the intestines, tearing of the channel of the colon, and all such things; and little force should be applied because if held too tightly, it may cause strain or stomach upset.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventilation of the two ribs in the neck may cause headaches, otitis and migraines, strangulation, pain at the roots of teeth, and is located at the level of brain base; you must instruct the nurse to express his hand carefully without cutting an artery or causing excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	the final treatment bo:
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause an illness which arises from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The sweating of the elbows is as much like from three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the nurse not to pierce too deeply, for the point is very near bone, and contains veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the buttocks is also effective for hemorrhoids and conditions below it, and it must be large and made of wax, which needs to be well melted; and sometimes if it were too thin, it would break; causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Leg suction cups are openly healing, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective for ancient aches of the legs, bladder, and kidneys; and relieve headaches in the temples, ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, bringing about palsy in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping is that you place it first empty and apply heat promptly, positioning it hastily and moving it evenly, without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell, with signs of slow bleeding; then remove, reapply the cups, and take care in the arrangement of limbs, as some have sensitive skin and clear veins: a single firm strike is sufficient, and wide shallow cuts should be made, and suction applied lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it must be struck twice: the first time to thin the blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it must be struck a third time; and when we want to draw out little blood at a time, then we only strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want to draw much blood, let us do so often; and if the veins are sparse, pierce deeply, and make sure that the cups of ventouses with oil for dispersing and dissolving are perforated quickly: if it is in this case, use violet oil or almond oil, or seed cucurbite oil; and if it is a wound, use chervil oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of almonds, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If the one to whom you dress a tender and wide wound, no oil needs to be applied, but after ventosating with rose water, or cold water, or nettle water, or cucurbite water, or porcelain water, or another similar liquid, it should be washed.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, or with myrtle water, and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with large excesses rise from old wine, or nettle water, or anise decoction or chamomile, or other similar liquids; they should not be ventosed before the bath or after the bath but one to two hours later; and they must not sleep after the ventosation, as it is necessary for them to sweat when they are to be ventosed and once ventosed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And beware for those who are blood-sick and have too much heat and inflammation; they should consume cool things such as pomegranates, endives, lettuces, similar items, mint puddings, cherries, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And those with a cold complexion should consume syrup made of honey, and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, small portions of food, mint puddings, small birds, and pigeons; and for each day he exercisebeamers more drinking than eating; it is advisable to give some patients triaicle or musk before ventilation, or afterward, to support the main limbs; and make subtle adjustments to their heat, but only those who are hot should consume this.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are placed without causing harm are those placed over the liver, and kidneys, and gout, and abdomen, buttocks, thighs, and calves, for these parts do not endure being pierced anywhere, and it is done only to draw blood from one part to another as we place on bruises when they heal; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we place suction cups over the abdamen and buttocks to reduce the size of the part; and alleviate pain, if there is congestion or stones, then perhaps by its attractive nature it draws out the congestion, or removes the stone from its place; thus it does when placed over the liver and kidneys when viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are arranged empty to squeeze as much blood as possible; they are never filled with fire alone, nor at times simply with cold water, just like in illnesses of excessive sweating, and thus it fills the suction cup with hot water or water that has been boiled with herbs suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The administration of the bladder is by fire as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it has two leather pieces each half a palm in width, and around the wound a small hole similar to that for pushing in a needle, made of flax or silk so that it does not irritate the patient when placed on the limb; and have within a crossbar from hair or iron thread, to place a lampwick, and they be large and small according to the illnesses and conditions of those who take them; for children's blisters are different than those of old men, and thinner than fattier.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this is how you should place the blister: take a wax candle or salve and put it across the crossbar which is within the blister, so that when lit at the bottom of the blister it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, with the leather pieces as previously described, and when you wish to do so, let the steam out, and remove the blister. Then take the salve as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the vacuum then, which is set up for pleurisy or any fresh injury, it has neither a rod nor a covering and is arranged only when it is full of liquid, and is applied to the limb solely. And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without vacuums are set up in members where you cannot place vacuums due to their small size, such as lips and gums, or similar areas; and in the naked flesh of the skin, like hairs or beard; and its qualities depend on whether you find vacuums that contain soft clear liquids, which can drip. Then take them; put them into a soft liquid until they are familiar to it, without anything in their bellies; then let blood flow from the membrane and the vacuum, rub the member until it becomes red, and place the vacuums; when they become full and burst, if you can place a vacuum there, do so because it is very useful afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If this is not the case, lift with ease and then apply a lot of water well, and then compress it; if the joint pains too much after moving without movement, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and put on top until swelling subsides; if there are multiple swellings, apply crushed vitriol or ointment, etc., until they subside; alternatively, place half of peeled feathers over the joint and let it dry so that it seals now. If you need more remedies, take additional poultices as needed.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the swellings do not subside, rub the area with fresh blood or insert an arrow until it draws out blood, and then place a poultice on it; as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry; when you see that they ooze, sprinkle some powdered aloe and yarrow blossom paste or ash, which will seal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the book on fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they deal with the healing of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn well, dear student, that the mad masters delve into this treatise, which they have never seen in any ancient books or read letters about; and for this reason the knowledge is strange on our land, as I have never found a good one; I know nothing of it, except through the wisdom of ancient books where I have studied so much that I have acquired its understanding, and by experimentation, and by the custom of my life; and in this chapter, I have described what is contained within, abbreviated at the end, and shown clearly the forms of maladies to be treated, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	; s;
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or luxation occurs in any part, it is necessary to have the patient fast on both sides if nothing needs to be entirely removed, such as fragments of bone, small children, or elderly; and if the time has not been very long or too cold; also avoid chilled joints (meaning conditions with cold sweats), poultry blood, veal, do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until there is no doubt of a hot abscess or discharge of material from the affected limb; then the patient will return to their previous state as they used to.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with meats that promote growth, or are viscous like boiled wheat, eggs, testicles, pancakes of veal, and offal, fish, freshly caught fish, large amounts of wine, and similar foods.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	To partial dislocation, movements are immediately present and soon there is a fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that old and decrepit bones cannot be well mended or fused according to their nature for the support of limbs, nor those too tender, like children's bones; but don't worry, reset with strong ligatures holding the broken bone together, until it regains its former strength; and do not neglect this work entirely, and therefore one must nourish with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because a fracture of the head is different from that of the hip or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	by to la maint les doue time cide the lits, that s, it so.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each manner has its own mechanism and instrument for restoration, according to what comes to mind in that place; and it is known the bone break by how the joint is twisted, well opened on one side, and pressed near the hand; and when there is no twisting or touching point, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is a fracture. But it can still have tortuosity, cracking, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	t (chestre the text s i; it and so as de te bon: M: est ueple: C'sui the ou f clac are all nul ben par le li croit la mermzard that a durduest by the tjr. O, they shteman et ie un
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which is in rebound, and are the two parts separated, they must now be set equally straight, as well as abscesses if they come near you; and if an abscess hardens nearby, leave it for no day until the abscess is soothed; then put it even with movements that you can perform easily and gently, and know that its restoration is easier than those of others where there are pieces; then strain it, as it must after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and it is separated into two parts, whether hand or foot, or to your arm where small members are, or two cords, or one cord and your hand; then place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are disconnected, rejoin them by all means at their places with movements you can perform, and ensure through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and properly set both ends of the bone in the best possible forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels a strong sensation in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: treat gently and do not stretch or press too much, as those who cause abscesses and swelling through their methods often have seen us many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is at a standstill, so punish the patient well that it does not move, neither in wakefulness nor sleeping, nor turning, or in any other way; and ensure the limb is secure enough that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, then it is not at a standstill, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain; and ensure it is put uprightly, so twisting does not occur as it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb will be according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	;
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: you must wrap them in soft and fine linen cloth; and for larger ones, like thighs and legs: you should use a wide and hard strap, so that the large straps encompass the whole limb evenly, with no unevenness; then place light padding around it, three or four times depending on the size of the limb, and hold onto the entire strap at first, then go above the breakage and loosen slightly more as the breakage moves away a bit from you; and gradually soften the strap little by little until you grasp a large portion of the healthy part, then take another stunted strap, and turn it back to its original position; then return to below the breakage, and strain moderately, not too hard or too lightly, as we have said in the first section above; then place linen rags between the straps so they are even, then wrap once more with a bandage, and then put well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a cooling ointment for the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it thus for several days; then strengthen with straps, and they should be moistened from a broad stainless chain, or wood used to make grooves, or palm fronds, in accordance with this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But it is necessary that the strap applied to the break be slightly larger and wider than the others; and as long as needed for small or large limbs; then strain with the straps as you did on the first reset, then above a thread temporarily, just like in the initial reset of the fracture; thinner is better; therefore, it should be medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen; because if the threads are too thick, as I have seen workers tying their rope-making flax lines too tightly, it is a great error, for the strap cannot be even if it's too subtle, and it should not be more than two finger widths apart between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the head of the shoulder after being strained back into place, put poultices of flax or charred cloth under them so they do not shift.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, and the skull is fractured, I will explain its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not require extracting all broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limb is large, it does not require putting in splints more than after V or VII days, or longer depending on the risk of infection setting in; and here is the way ancient physicians used to mend fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take some flour that sticks to the mill walls, mix it with abundant egg, and make this concoction not too clear nor too thick, and apply it, and this is the common method of a splint restoring broken bones in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take arar root and lavender, anise and asafetida and Arabian gum, 10 grains each; musk and aloeswood, 5 grains; ambergris .viiij. (7) grains; and make a powder of it, with honey mixed with egg white. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this plaster, as its composition is beneficial, and quickly heals broken bones for many individuals.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another method of splint for torsion: take mugat and myrobalan, two or three times; cassia and aloes, nine times; acacia six times; balm Armenic ten times, grind well, and concoct with water or plenty of egg, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to treat dislocated joints and severed bones is to replace them with new ones; it alleviates the pain that arises, and artisans cut the bone, and fractures: take a fresh one, and wrap it in cloth and cooked oil, and place it at the site.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These dressings do not restore, but are good to soothe hot abscesses and properly alleviate pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for dressings that heal broken bones: take dried leaves of mulberry and ground ivy leaves, and grind together to make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to dress the healing of bone fractures and to ease its remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take wormwood root, chamomile flowers, violet blossoms, wheat flour from each part; and grind, then mix with wine, and if the limb is chafed, apply it with moist coriander water or water, and wash off.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of plastering more than the first, when a long-lasting abscess occurs in restoring the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of valerian and linseed, balm, mallow, wormwood, and saxifrage, as well as flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them up, and mix with water (salted or fresh) or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras writes in his book that nothing but a mixture of wax and oil should be applied to a broken limb for restoration; he advises it not to be too hard or too soft between two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it appears to Galen that one should apply dry and slightly warm substances such as myrrh, frankincense, and incense, among others, for the restoration of a broken limb, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of treatment for injury and pain: take dogwood bark and hellebore leaves, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, and mix them equally, then grind them and make a paste.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then loosen them a bit again, and beware that the patient does not feel any pain or move their bones out of place; if they do loosen themselves over time, and pain comes to the limb, or itching, restlessness, swelling, act quickly, remove the plaster now; take light gauze, a damp sponge from the sea, soak in water, lift the bandage until itching stops and is relieved of pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then apply dry cloth moistened with water or oil roseate, and bind with linen under a weight until you are sure of healing heat; thus alleviate inflammation in the limb, remove the pain, then resume delicate bandaging and some plastering, but not as firmly as before; continue to be gentle until it is fully healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are spread throughout the bone, and you need lead ointment and binding, then resume as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not reset it until after III or IIII or V or VII days; and never leave it for XX days, as seen, until the breaker is healed, and brings the joint above the chest close again; then more firmly than before, and fat consumes its flesh, as I have said earlier; and if you see it drying more than necessary, know that no swelling will come; therefore give it warm water often whenever you reset it, and do so each day, and loosen a bit the dressing; thus by this method you counteract swelling in the limb, and hasten what skilled surgeons do, who return the joint correctly: it is bad practice, and I see nothing else but healing and working properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	In various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many ways of breaks occur, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that result from sword impacts, whereby all the bone is broken up to its shaft which lies below the bone, as if made by an axe or club; thus this type of break is called "hachure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword pierces the bone from above without splitting it, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small cracks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact with embedding, splitting, or stone-like fragments in the bone, or falling on the bone, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	When there is a persistent break, reaching just below the skin that lies under or above the bone, causing this wound which may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that has healed in the bone as fine as horse hairs, and it's a small fissure, thus this breakage is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by being pierced with an arrow or falling, or similar things, where the piece of bone enters inside, and lies above like a blacksmith when they place iron on anvils; if it's between the bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 This occurs more in those who have bones that are easily dislocated like children's; and it happens in all these ways of fractures where small pieces become separated as if they were such, and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of fractures by separation underneath them and inquisition on rods, and by the corrupted cartilage which is beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	; That do theye la peck: ne: car; that yout les se mar: If you sont c. Incorujn: the unnerment y lo-JJ. (and by 1.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of broken bones, be aware of accidents involving the patient, and if you see any bad accidental occurrences such as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding forcefully and reddening, and other similar conditions in many forms, he cannot cure without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any serious accidents, and expect a cure, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when pain first comes to you, and it is winter time, the bone should be removed on the fourteenth day of healing that you can do.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is so, if you remove the bone within seven days, thus ensuring that the tissues below the bone are not corrupted, then the accidents we have mentioned will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the fracture of the bone reaches near the flesh that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus: and it is that you shall cut the head as severely wounded by the patient, and reveal the bone in all possible ways, and on top of the wound's appearance more delicately than possible, and when bleeding flow occurs upon exposing the bone or abscesses arise, use what should be used at this; and fill the cavity with linen cloth soaked in rose oil; then let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and you can ensure blood loss has ceased; then begin working around the bacterium: one method is that you cut a narrow tail-end towards the front, which forms the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the work is diverse and large it as thou shalt fasten them with points are iron and let be them quickly do not let up fasten on.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is out and hardened, it must be that you pierce around it, thus making incisions with tweezers, not too deep so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle at its tip, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to the specific part of the bone's edge, with tweezebacks for all tests. And this is the form of the three methods of tweezers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of the piercing inside the fractured bone is that you place a tweezeback on the bone and turn it until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the twezeback slightly, doing this around, then cut with scissors the space between the pieces, do so subtly as possible and gently, as we have said, until you take out the bone to your hand or any of the tools like pliers, forceps; and ensure that you do not touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it, it is necessary to treat the preparation that has been left by the bone from any instrument resembling a chisel, but it must be more fixed and finer than other chisels; if there are no small bones or scales remaining, then gently use the levers; then care for the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks call "more effective," and it requires much force, as they say.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose the bone where the break is open so that when you have exposed that part, place it under the head of this lenticular saw, which has the following shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut from one side, and it is the part hard in two ways, for the cutting tool faces towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet lightly all around the bone, taking care of the padding underneath; if it's loose to the bone, gently remove the bone without harming it or causing pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and it is cut so severely from above, leaving small pieces, you must address that roughness and remove the scales with a fine file for which you should have various quantities, in order to treat each place as most effectively possible according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If it has been cut too deeply before by large shears, and afterwards by finer ones, continue in this manner until well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate haircuts and fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its severity; this is something not easily remedied by those who have studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the sack is uncovered, it must be taken that you sew a linen bandage according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten with oil-rosinated flannel, then place on the wound; then take another doubled linen bandage in two or three layers, moisten with wine and rosined oil, and place over the first bandage; do this as lightly as you can, without burdening the sack, then treat above the other layer (of skin), but do not stretch it more than necessary to cover the wound only; leave thus for a day or two until the inflammation subsides, then remove, and apply medicines such as lily roots, ground barley, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; from these make powder, and apply it on the ward, and administer non-mordanting medicines; ensure that the wound remains clean, neither leaving any ointment nor letting flesh grow together, for when flesh grows over a bandage covering the brain, they harden and cause much harm; because when one applies something mordant to the sack, it constricts from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, if by any accident something comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If only darkness comes due to the medicine applied upon it, and its virtue is present, then you must select a piece of honey, mix three parts oil with rose water in it, apply on cloth, place over the wound; then treat as appropriate remedies until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is said that the two upper parts of the neck are not broken, nor separated from one another, for they are bones; and the lower part is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bruise or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If either of the two parts is broken, you should insert a small finger or index into your nostrils and place the breakage inside your nose in line with its natural shape, using gentle pressure until it aligns; do this carefully, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck and the bone cannot be brought to its place, you must align it slightly with the handle of a knife that is somewhat thickened.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the breakage is in two parts, repeat as before and try to restore it by the first day if you can; if not, after seven or at most ten days when the swelling has calmed down, then insert strips of linen cloth into the nostrils where the breakage is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you wrap another bandage on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be large enough to fill up the bone's protrusion.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And certain healers say one must warm the tentons with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem to me that this is well, but it must be warmed with a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the tendon, until the bone has set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	On any occasion when goose feathers are placed near the tent opening and if there is a slight draft, it causes the dislocation to break, making the patient cough; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the patient while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small amount of diacron.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there are no abscesses present, then apply a poultice of wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk; place it on gauze pads without tying them up; and if the break due to teeth is small and broken into tiny pieces, extract as appropriate straws, then cut the fissure, and cure any foreign objects such as splinters and glass shards using suitable poultices and ointments for this; and if there are no wounds inside the gums, apply a warm tent until it is healthy again.
de la routure de la mandibule	For the treatment of a jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated without any wound being present, and the fractures are not severe, but merely broken in two parts due to internal bulges, if one recognizes it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fractures are on the right side, to insert your index finger of your hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fractures are on the left mandible, place your index finger from the right hand inside gently, and guide it with the other hand carefully, making sure they align properly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fractures of the jaw are dislocated in two parts, it is necessary to adjust the alignment by extending both parts evenly until they align correctly.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movements of the teeth occur, or grinding, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place on the broken jaw cerot, and on top put double cloth; and on the cloth place a large well-made stone, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it according to how you want it moved, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, straighten the joint once a day, and then reset what has been moved; place plaster on it with finely ground powder or flour of masticum after removing the cerot; put light linens over the plaster, and as long as the cast is drying, ensure the patient's position remains unchanged; often it will be correctly set in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone remains exposed; carefully remove the fragments near the tendons without delay.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with thread as necessary.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces of bone, and there is no remaining piece, then cut the wound, if it's wide, and place suitable splints near the tendons to support, until it heals properly.
de la forcele	aulben; don’t What does so
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The great break occurs many times at the shoulder, in three ways: it is broken and torn into two parts with pieces, and it is easier to repair; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is as follows when there is a fracture with an open wound: have two assistants, one who applies heat to the broken shoulder; and the other supports the neck towards the injured part; then align the break evenly across your shoulders so that the shape is correct, without any unevenness or gaps.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, put a round sphere made of cloth or linen under the shoulder of the patient; and expand and release the breakage, holding onto the sphere with your hand, so that it is aligned correctly as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the top of the shoulder out because it comes from far back, then it is necessary for the patient to lie over their stomach and place a medium-sized earring under the shoulder blade, with ministers pushing upward on the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder joint has moved.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the break in your bones and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut into them; gently extracting the pieces. If the bone cannot be joined by any means, place the instrument on one of the incisions made earlier, but ensure this avoids touching the shoulder joint:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 Et semble une cuillère, et n’est mie chevêche, et soit aussi large qu'il lui convient, selon le grandor de l’os et la force de l’œuvre; et ait II chiés, si comme tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et les autres étroits, semblable au traçage de la plaie que tu as faite quand tu as trayt les os; et quant tu es assuré d'apostème chaud, cout la plaie, et si le tracé est petit, ou tu doutes apostème chaud, emplois la plaie de draps et de tentures, selon sa quantité.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses are present there, apply an oil-soaked cloth and linen and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 Le serrage des os lorsqu'ils sont douloureux et difficiles à traiter est que tu appliques sur l'os de la poudre du moulin avec une huile d’orge et mets des compresses légères, puis pose un grand bandage autour de l'épaule si nécessaire; ensuite prends une très grande bénitente d'une paume de largeur, puis place deux draps par-dessus les compresses, et le pansement; ensuite prend une gouttière fine de trois doigts de large et longue, enveloppe autour du bandage, afin que la partie supérieure du bandage soit à plat ; puis pose la gouttière sur la fracture, tourne le bandage sous le coude, et au-dessus de l'épaule sainte (non blessée), et au-dessus de l'articulation malade ; ensuite resserrez chaque partie, et lorsque tu vois que les ligaments maintiennent la fracture à présent, récompense chacun tous les jours, et quand ils sont remis en place, le laisse ; fait dormir le malade sur son dos et mets un petit oreiller sous l’épaule pour lever l'articulation du haut ; cela allège la douleur de l'articulation par l'alignement de l'omoplate, ou tu attaches le bras au cou, tant que des événements malheureux ne surviennent pas pendant vingt jours ; puis recommence à appliquer la poudre si nécessaire, et tient-le ainsi jusqu'à ce qu'il soit restauré ; il sera restauré en moins de trente-huit jours pour certains hommes.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of shoulder fractures.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Sometimes the shoulder is fractured or dislocated without being moved much, and it should not be forced to move; if you set it according to the nature of the break, and align the joint naturally in all ways that you can; then put powdered molten wax with plenty of oil on it; also place gentle bandages under a double layer of fabric; then place a wide and fine pillow, slightly wider than the shoulder, so that at no point on the shoulder there is movement from the pillow, and wrap it evenly with linen strips; and bind it firmly until the pillow does not move from its place, and observe the joint each day; every time it becomes sore, rewrap it, and adjust the pillow if it moves from its position, while the patient lies on their side; after which, in 20 or 25 days, remove it gently, as bones do not become strong easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone juts out and not from the edge, make an incision there, and remove the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment of abscesses with hot pus.
de la brisure dou pis	In the case of a broken foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The body is sometimes broken internally, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks when forced.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken internally and begins to weaken, the patient feels great pain, lack of strength, exhaustion, and sometimes vomits blood, with joints becoming loose in the fractured bones, and they feel very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The process of restoration involves the patient lying on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulders, pressing the shoulder blades together, and gently binding both sides with hands to align all body parts as much as possible until the bone's shape is correct; then apply liniments or other light substances wrapped in cloth over the fracture so it does not move; return the ligament roundness to its place on the back, strain cautiously, and gradually release each hour according to healing progress, continuing to bind if swelling occurs. If separation is necessary due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, proceed quickly; separate it, clean the area, and apply suitable remedies; then gently strain until it is well-healed.
de la brisure des costes	The breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is the fractures that arise behind and at the base, and they lie on the back, and it needs to be inquired about them well.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the healing is such that you must set the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then place the splint, and use a stake if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the inside, the patient feels great pain and pressure, similar to pleurisy, for the bone does not have flesh; it has nerves, and they spill a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients placed great remedies upon them.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And those who say that it should be treated with meats that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fracture forward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not attempt to make abscesses appear if they are not present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is there, and the wound heals.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that applying cups on the area to draw out humors is reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping may attract excesses to the weakened area.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	the so that’s le m s and se la; Thebiffront. Hep domme:
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels such great pain that they cannot bear touching the injured bone, and doubt is in their mind, then it must be dissected near the break of the ribs, and an instrument should be used to protect them; and then one must cut the bone, gently pulling it out a little, and then sew up the wound's two edges if they are large, and treat with splints until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If abscesses come to pass, then place on them cloths soaked in oily rose oil, and put over the affected area; treat as necessary based on what is required for an abscess, and let it lie on a shelf or side where appropriate until healed.
de la brisure dou col	For a broken collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes breakage of the shoulder bone, and it does not collapse; also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, take care if you see their hands become softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor extend them, and when pricked with a needle, they feel nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that they are dead but in some conditions, and if they can move and feel well when strained gently, know that the bone's joint is saved, and the patient will be healed if care is provided.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if similar things occur in the spine of the back and you need to know whether it is healthy or not, be cautious if the joints are softened, and if there are injuries present, and there are twitches under the back that jump impulsively without will; and when once it has been lifted on its stomach, it jumps with egestion lacking volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if it is lifted onto its back and it wants to roll over, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that they are deadly: do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then this is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply warm oil or goose fat if there's an abscess, on the spine until it's soothed; then place it under a comforting and dry compress, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover the area with clean cloth; then move the bone back into place, and sew together the two edges of the wound, using a stitch if they're large; and if the head of the bone is broken, known as "the joint of the knee", apply your poultice from your left hand and hold it up to your right hand at eye level, then place an ice pack on top, if needed; then secure it, and if there are dislocated bones, separate them and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	for a broken thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is not much reduction at its head; they cause a long deformity, descend to the pelvis, come to the patient's pain in place, and protrude as though broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, as long as it's on the fracture; and discern what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is only in the head, then align the fracture so that it becomes naturally.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it descends to the pelvis, then make the patient lie on their belly until the restoration of that fracture is properly aligned.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have set it evenly, place on a splint, then put a wooden or metal pin underneath, and hold the breakage so that it does not move; and mend the gap from above the ribs until it is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed; and then proceed as we have mentioned before; and then return to restoration, and hold it firmly as needed unless there has been no harmful outcome; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the breakage of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, as it should be repaired according to one of the two ways; which is that you take a piece of fresh meat of moderate size in this manner:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And you bind two heads with two straps and tie them upwards, then shave the patient under one strap; then pour some boiled meat over the broken part until it reaches half a cubit, and have half a foot of stick inserted therein, then suspend it from any weighty object or extenders used by servants; then place the mire's hand on either side of the breakage equally, until the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is more outwardly directed, restrain the ligaments from the rupture, and around it, and extend each member to its share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, it must be that you apply a ligament above the socket and another on the collarbone below the break; similarly, if the fracture is towards the collarbone, one must gently place a ligament without strain until the fracture is evenly positioned over its original place and the collarbone; then align the fracture correctly and tighten it, unless an abscess arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses occur, do not tighten the ligature for more than seven days, and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses until the abscess is eased; then secure it again, with the method being that you place an envelope on the fracture, assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand under the shoulder or breast; wrap the bandage, tightening above the shoulder and along the arm so that the arm returns to its natural shape unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the fracture does not move, so use of splints, and place a splint more robust and broader than the others; have two pieces, and it has as large as three parts; then straps on each piece is sized such that it passes over the break. Then apply them as they are thusly, and less frequently
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the situs of abscesses and tightening as we have said, in the hour when you restore the broken limb, and doubt about an abscess arising, let it rest on a ligature until the seventh day as we have said; then check each three days the suture, that neither swelling nor any inflammation comes to the place where it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If as we have said
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 If such accidents do not occur, then they shall not dislocate after III days or more, and the patient must lie on their back with hands placed on their stomach; and place one cushion of plain linen evenly beneath the shoulder, and watch each hour of the day or night to ensure that the injured limb does not move or soften the ligaments. Proceed according to the virtue of medicine, and give them flesh as we have previously instructed, in a manner so that the flesh is at its most subtle; and when they begin to regain strength, it should be substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be restored in 40 days entirely; and then they shall dislocate, administer a bath and ointment remedies to properly align them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is unpleasant and embedded, it remains to be dislocated for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	To treat a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, called the "ulna" and the "radius," one small and holding the elbow, the other large and extending below toward the little finger; sometimes just the large ulna is broken, or the small radius, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small vessels are broken, restoration is easy, and healing; but when large vessels are broken, the treatment is bad, and more painful than if they were all broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only small vessels are broken, slight extension should be done easily, and kept even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is large vessels that are broken, then the extension must be stronger; extend under cushioning, and position the hand's pouchet higher than others, with smaller fingers lower than others, and cross hands over themselves simultaneously, placing the cushion in front of them higher so they don't feel any strain. Then extend the short arm to the part below their hand or at the ligament, and another assistant to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then apply the bandage evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break to pieces, place each piece where it belongs, and if any are not aligned with their joints, push them into position; if they cannot be restored to their place, then cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a break with an open wound, I will discuss it with the individual practitioner; they should take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if in the beginning of healing abscesses appear, use a dressing made from rose oil and white wax pitch, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; gently place the dressing over the abscesses until they are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then remove the pitch, and place the plaster with an abundance of egg whites, ensuring it covers all fractures thoroughly, making the bandage for the break stronger and slightly wider than the others; know that there must be six or more bands depending on how they are arranged: whether the break is in one bone or two, and strain tighter over the break than other areas, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter. Let the dressings above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and use linen threads that are not too thick nor thin for binding.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And restore the limb and its connection after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident befalls the limb, as itching that comes upon the limb does occur, you must bathe the member in warm water until the itch is soothed; and allow the limb not to rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone is freed, and such things, it will heal itself.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, one must soften it a little and let it rest for some days until the swelling subsides, then begin straining again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said come upon the patient, then do not reset the dislocation until XY days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or if you are unable to do so, then pin the hands at his neck and make them equal in length, guard against movement and digestion, and let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture is restored within XY days or XLV days, sometimes even XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Such that at the back of the hand there occur few fractures, and not often complete breaks.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	Of the nemenmet il iste a la sire, ne doit met elle tires si lent la mues que tu est les emples de flosme seigne li paiset eus, qui prise, et si i est ceste, en li puet ardre oste, se bienemontraie l’est a la carolem ie.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is around the tooth beneath the sole of the foot, make a splint out of linen and instruct the patient to fasten it at their broken bone; then stretch with a long bandage, and let the knot be as large as the hand's palm, and secure, as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is in the heel, it is proper to place a splint above and another below on the sole, so that the foot remains open and straight; then tie around the entire hand, securing the connection between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture is in one of the toes, if it's a sprain, make it level as necessary; and secure with the sole, and if you see fit, place a small straight splint to elevate the breakage without movement; and if the fracture is in other toes like the index or others, make them even, and bind with the healthy toe that follows; or bind all together with one bandage so it may move as needed, or place a splint above as necessary; and take care in restoring and arranging for abscess drainage.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and you can see when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration consists in a ligament above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then extends each member of the body equally to its side; and this is when the breakage is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be toward the wrist and the other below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee and its extension; next place the splint on the bone equally with both hands so that it follows its natural shape, and then apply the cast, avoiding any swelling.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess, allow it to be soothed first and then return to your work and treatment; the lithotomy is done in a certain manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary that you wrap above the fracture with one or two doubled bandages and leave excess material; then turn the leg so that the heel reaches towards the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee, letting the head of the filament rise upwards; then turn above the leg and above the hip with the bandage, place an upright piece at the fracture site, and then fasten it to the bone's length using a strap made from soft cloth for equal pressure; next begin tying three or four full turns around the fracture. As you move higher on the fracture, reduce the tension; then go back to the two feet of the filament between the leg and the hip with three uprights placed above it, and then return to below where the thread meets the foot; if the bone stays in place, leave it like this without any swelling or bulging occurring.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it occurs and is dislocated, adjust as it approaches; as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they must be set right, or removed by sawing through the flesh, pulling out fragments; and treated as we have said, until healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the thigh broken as in setting arrows and arms; however, in such a restoration, it does not cause harm to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one day or a little more or less, depending on the various temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the groin's hollow gland
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know well that at the back of the neck there is often a slight fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not much, but rather a crack or piercing, and occurs with any wound, feels like a wound, and seems quite well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts together what was separated on its two sides until they can move; then put the splint, and if necessary, round pegs as well, and strain it as needed, then address all the dispositions we have said in other breaks, like abscesses hot and similar; apply to each accident that which is suitable for them, until they are healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	by: (ou cide sa qus or n' s
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones: one is called "tibia" and the other is called "femur"; all fractures occur as they do in the arm, with restoration similarly to the arm, and all treatments apply likewise. And if both bones break together, the leg turns at all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and can be seen clearly; thus, there is a deformity.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then make the adjustment and align it evenly, and stabilize the ligaments equally; however, if there is an unsightly fracture, and there are various fragments where the alignment needs to be smaller and lighter; follow the method according to your expertise.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of hazelwood that encircle the leg from one end to another, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then wrap each in turns with a band above and below, tying them tightly together so the leg cannot lean left or right, which is good; and no one administers any other movement of the leg if it's made of wood, and they place the leg for protection from movement, properly done at the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there are pus or any other accident; treat as long as it remains healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the fracture of the bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot's bone a break occurs and in the toes, with no injury that causes discomfort or certain conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the foot bone and you see these bones protruding on each other, place your maladies so that the foot touches the ground just like it would walk, then place your own foot under theirs where the bones are elevated, then press until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and bandage around it, and put a small pincers with two flat points under the belly of the affected foot, then stretch it back to its normal position, after which you have wrapped cloths around, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, release the ligament because you will find the bones even, broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any broken bones, repair them as we have said for the hand of a man; then place on the broken bone a splint according to its length and width, and place beneath the foot the table I mentioned earlier, and secure it quickly; and if there are two or three, or more, breakages, place on each bone a splint according to its amount, wrapped in one linen cloth, and attach the table beneath the leg so that they rest above the belly of the leg well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each injury as it should be done.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the breakage of the bone in the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman is broken and she must sit for an extended period, tilt her towards the less painful side, and support from behind; then fill the nature with linen cloth soaked in warm water according to its bulk; have her stand up gradually and slowly, and when possible, gently pull the linen out until it reaches the opening of the nature (vagina), and restores the bone fragment along with it. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once done, let it return to its place; continue this process for 7 days or so: if properly executed, the fracture will be restored. If you wish to ensure proper healing, take a goat bladder, tie a thread at one end, and fill it with warm water from the other side. Blow air into the tube until the bladader is filled; then let the nature return the broken bone. Fill it again with cotton and leave it like this for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the arm's elbow is broken, or in women, restore it as we have said for the thighbone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and work to this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For the broken bone indicates various approaches for restoration: therefore, firstly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When it should be done thus and in the brisure de l’oeu, que li les mete, tetre mout estent orle la haus, qui nes. Et quant elle vient ou ne pelez en entour, et le plix: soi sene au plusors; se pren, et les cholez la brisure de l'est que il rite.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with a fracture and wound, especially if it is as large as the hip or shoulder bone or similar, to be well bandaged now, so that the bandages we have mentioned prove effective.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy but has been touched by vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to reset the fracture again at that same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	they; s the t 0 :l* (do not quite, it: m one of the same.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the joint, it should be carefully straightened slightly with your hands in small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not allow you to adjust evenly with your hands, use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or six hooks and its width according to the amount of injury; thus it is necessary for the master that he grips three or four (hooks), depending on how much he needs in each fracture treatment; be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, with a large part forward:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palanching," so the head of the clavicle must be placed over the visible part of the bone; and then gently tapped until they are evenly aligned with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle, and muscles cannot properly grip the bone, then it is necessary to cut off the head of the clavicle until the muscles have space.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with an instrument suitable for this purpose, either cutting or smoothening to your ability; then remove that which is lodged in the sharp and hard splinters of bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If it is possible to place the bone correctly and then apply a black ointment mixed with vinegar, ensuring proper application; do not put any cerot or other substances on the wound that may cause rot and decay; once you have restored the bone and left the wound uncovered, wrap the entire area according to the size of the wound, taking care to avoid straining the wound with movement; many times, wise men have done this, bringing about healing or death in various cases. The tension should be gentler and more flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is large or bad, and you suspect that no incident has occurred, as we have said, but there is pain at the site, then do not apply bandages; instead, wrap around it with sturdy cloths directly over the bones.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when after one or two days you see swelling at the wound, and if you have applied any bone oil that was used previously, then apply healing balm to the wound as an antiseptic like the universal balm ointment.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is proper that the limb be braced so that the bow can move gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If more than one day passes and it cannot heal but returns to its bent state, for there are small pieces of bone causing the pain; therefore, you must diligently cover the wound with a bandage and remove all extraneous bones that cause such pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula appears at the site, or another form of decay, it is necessary to treat it accordingly as described in this chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, as with the hip or shoulder, and other similar injuries to major limbs, do not suture it, for many times this leads to death but leave it until it heals; perhaps it will naturally close after twenty days or thirty. Then treat the wound if you know how; if not, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	From bruises which come upon the ulceration
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the ulceration, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant thing to see is how the limb appears; and sometimes cannot perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Thus beware if the patient is fresh: if you administer stipulative medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, frankincense, and other similar substances, whether taking one of these alone or all together, and mix with astringent wine or an abundance of honey or a syrup; and put on the body in bandages well tightened, and do not loosen them for days. Then release it, and start over with another piece until the swelling is gone; or you may constrain under a well-made plaster as its property that it draws out all inflammation from above the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hard like stone, and needs to be removed, scrape away the excess skin; or take them to a barber who shaves off until they are gone, and heal while still healing.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored and remains weak and delicate afterward due to many causes: one being that it was bound too tightly, and not loosened as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, preventing circulation in the limb; or due to frequent irritations; or from excessive movements at improper times; or because it has little blood within its body, thus making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you should feed the patient well and keep his body relaxed until there are many blood vessels in him again; and give him baths, bringing him joy and cheerfulness; then apply heat to the limb so it draws great nourishment to it, and often remove the cover with cold water, until the nutrition reaches the member; and he returns to his natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Dislocation of a limb after health returns
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the affected limb is unsightly, yet it still maintainures its natural workmanship: do not believe the madmen who say that you must break a new member; many foolish people have done so in our land; these practices are blameworthy, and great harm comes from them, sometimes even death. However, if the nerves and twisted bones are fresh, then it is necessary to raise them with hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked as foxglove leaves, roots, meadow-sweet, and similar things; and make a poultice of mallows, like good diaquilon, and take the musk root of vismalwart confit with geese grease or oil of sesame, and apply the poultice. Alternatively, you can use fatty figs ground with flaxseed flour, and other medicines that alleviate swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 At no time is there bone knitting by constantly and lengthily rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And so facilitate movement in each limb at any hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	When the tortuousness is aged and hardened, like a stone, it needs to be removed with iron, if necessary cutting up to the bone, using a delicate saw-like instrument; and place poultices and give careful attention in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs on any part, now it must be brought back gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if one is late, and the lump has swelled, and if it is painful to return it to its place; therefore, do not move it at the hour when it is inflamed: many times this brings buboes and other pains; however, once this occurs, soothe the patient, then leave them, until the abscess is calmed; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, gently massage each member as treatment appears in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	the s: igne:
des mandibules	Of the lower jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the mandible is dislocated outward, and there are two ways of dislocation: either it's slightly off from its place and swolps a bit; or it is entirely dislocated, hanging toward the cheek, causing saliva to not be held in the mouth nor able to close the mouth, enveloping the tongue during speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it may return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is complete and done, then hasten to massage it gently without squeezing; in such a manner that the medicinal substance colors the head of the patient, and pour a few drops from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, wherein the dislocation is divided into two parts; and let the other hand be free to balance it. Then command the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	, et que rist of his a lassue les peux sores: ici au de pain, ou jucle dis locations they mandres so the cemai; deter the plaster and pain ee, that the patient, but for it beand li brize. Andre, par ces ointenz saignent tis, duces of l’esquiter les, çui la de la m si vaille jue le disin their toile s;
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	If it is difficult to reset, especially if they are the two lower jaws together, use hot water and oil until gently relocated; do not wrench while doing so, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 When they are equally returned, the patient's mouth closes well and feels softened; then place a cloth moistened with an ointment made of rose oil and wax, after which lightly bind it with soft ties; let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows so that they do not move to either side or strain themselves. Encourage them to eat easy meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws have been fully bathed and cleansed; then allow what they wish for a light meal without forcing them to open their mouth while eating or drinking, as long as the mandibles remain well-soaked and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	Et si les deux mâchoires ne peuvent être remises à leur place en une heure, ni repositionnées correctement, alors on peut avoir des fièvres habituelles, diarrhée ou nausée avec vomissements purulents occasionnellement.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	Et quand vous observez cela, alors vous savez qu'il s'agit d'une perte ; de nombreuses fois ceux qui souffrent meurent au cours des sept jours suivants.
de la forcelle	Of the joint's forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot be dislocated within the ribcage and lower region, and is never dislocated easily, causing much pain to those who experience it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 The restoration method is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then firmly press the joint with your palm, and it will return; then apply heat to the area and a poultice, and immobilize; and the leg which is towards the couch cannot dislocate again; if not possible, or if it does so at any time, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply heat to the area and a poultice, and immobilize, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well; similarly, this method is used for bringing back the shoulder blade when dislocated from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 We say that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way where it dislocates from the lower part of the arm; and another at the upper part of the arm; and occasionally above, which happens rarely; and does not dislocate backwards nor internally near the nerves; and often dislocates towards the forearm, especially in those with little flesh, because to these it moves quickly; and for those with enough flesh, it moves easily but returns just as quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to certain men with a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It therefore requires you to test it until certainty is achieved; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that with dislocation when it moves towards the axle, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity obvious; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the shoulder where the top of the shoulder meets, just as if it were some ears; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its place, nor move in any way; similarly, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly find it at the axle; and this kind of dislocation is not only to be realigned when it is new or if the child feels unwell.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then removes the shoulder blade and lifts the joint forcefully back to its place; the minister lifts the hand again and extends it upwards, placing it beneath; this will be done swiftly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the child should be bathed in warm water; and soothe them with moistening and calming substances, such as an infusion of elderflower and fenugreek and milletwort in water, and apply it; then place the child on his back, and under the shoulder put a strap equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the fingers of the hand below the malaid's heel, and lift the top of the shoulder gently, and move the limb upwards with your hand; another minister treats the head of the malaide so that it does not move forward; this shoulder returns immediately now, and if you see the joint according to this method: and make sure a man who is taller than the malaid is present; and stand beside him, and place the shoulder below the malaides back, and lift the shoulder upwards, so that the child hangs in the air; another minister moves the hand of the meblade towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, reinforce them with something heavy so that the dislocation does not return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the joint can be treated in another way: it is that one makes a long stick and buries it into the ground so that its top level with the patient's shoulder blade, neither too thick nor too narrow; then place it behind the patient, ensuring they have sufficient padding above, while the patient lies on their long back firmly; then stretch out their hand to the opposite side properly; and the joint will return to its place quickly. And if it does not return for all these reasons we mentioned, do this treatment: take a stick of two arm's length and four thumbs wide, which has one end pointed so that it can enter straight back under the shoulder according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then wrap the head with soft cloths so they do not prick the patient, then place it under the neck of the sick person; extend your arms over the length of a staff, and secure the shoulder to the staff, with the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm above an arch of a wide stretcher, let the hands hang downward, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joints will be now secured.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done in any way at all, if you must place under the neck of a spindle threaded with wool equally, then apply the poultice fitted with powder from grinding, with incense and egg yolk around the entire shoulder and near it, then strain off liquid from the poult groove.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that it heal as soon as the members are strengthened so it will be more days or less than five and then move; and if it is firm and let them loose, if not stiffen.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is forced out by moisture or another reason, it must be treated with three small cauterizations as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after six or seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift either arm forward, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or stretched out or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the back and buttocks is caused by a blow, and extension of the arms, and you must administer other remedies; treat until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and sluggish movements, many times it is used on the patient until the stiffness eases and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation of the joints in the shoulder blade.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	He says that the joint of the shoulder blade is displaced to points, and returns to points; and it has been displawed from all parts, especially in front and back, and dislocation is not properly reduced because one can see it well and feel it well; and displaced according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the bad joint with its bone, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it must be reset as soon as abscesses arise therein, for if they come to pass, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes not all of it can be reset at once, especially when it is in the back; such dislocations are worse than others, causing greater pain, and possibly leading to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be reset, extend its hand to your two hands; and arms are spread apart, and hands according to the bone around, above and below, place the joint back together or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, when it doubles its hand to its own hand, and the root of the palm's hinge that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to place, administer strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and tie with their ropes, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm in each direction, after enveloping a double wide and long cloth; and when the joint is connected to its bone again, anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it regains position; and once it is back in place, apply dry oatmeal with egg whites, strain firmly, and immobilize the arm at the painful side for several days.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in place, then release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the paste and bandage again, and leave it for several days until it is securely set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if after resetting the joint it feels instability and moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until soothed; or put on the joint a piece of fatty mutton wool, then leave for a day and night, then bandage, and let them take a bath; and when they sweat, rub the joint tenderly, then replace the mutton wool, and then bathe; thus do it twice or three times until healed; if you see this, put on moist warm barley ashes with butter, and bind over; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	Hand dislocation
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is slight, and its return is easy compared to other joints Therefore, it must be promptly returned to its place at once when dislocated, so that it may swell or develop an abscess as soon as possible.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The readjustments are that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend the fingers, and align them so they can put their palm over the joint area, pressing until it is correctly aligned; then ensure it has been properly reset before having them hold onto a straightened arm to maintain the adjustment.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, make the patient place their hand's back on a table, and let the physician place his hand under that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, then well; if not, apply the strain of soothing balms and ointments for abscesses, and let them be thus re-examined again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if it cannot be endured by him and you cannot place it back in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted; and neither this nor that can move anything for the patient until his hand becomes softened, and he is unable to grasp anything: then understand that a nerve or an artery has been cut off, or there is no other remedy than to pull it back with a caustic near the joint, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	but;
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved properly, and there is no sharpness, then warm water of milk, and rub until it becomes smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of hand bones
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 On no occasion are the two bones of the hand dislocated to either side, nor at the back of the palm or stomach; then they move as if locked in place and the dislocation remains within your grasp until it returns, then support the head of the joint, and turn towards the part where it is disjointed; leave them for two days, and then make them even on that day; and no more do you bind, as we have said, and the daily unbinding, and causing movement, and re-binding; and perform this often, until they are straightened, and just as before, if dislocated at the stomach of the hand, continue to do so until it is aligned properly; and similarly treat when dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the displacement of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no remedy, for it hastens death to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 The signs are that the excretions fall without willingness, cannot be held, and many times limbs are weakened, either both thighs or one arm or leg; often the spine dislocates in two parts; those whose vertebrae dislocate at the back are called "hollowed out": treatment is to return them where they were from childhood, if there has been no cure or healing entirely.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those that arise from falling or striking or other matters are treated by old methods with many words, which brings no great benefit; but I have abbreviated them according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 In the swelling that occurs at the front of the thigh, there is neither remedy nor health; similarly with those that come straight to both sides, and they cannot be cured unless by what properly comes on the back, as I say; and it must be that the patient lies extended on his face in equal places, and should have strain off from him, so he does not move. Then stick a tine at the head flatly into the earth, and another at the foot, and tie with cord around the joints of the patient's malady, and another around the calves, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the cords, one on the head and the other on the feet, among the twins. And they are well fastened as we have said, and the master sets his palms firmly along the spine properly, until it straightens out.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If it does not return through this method, take a stick three arms' length long, and lift from the surface, and let the patient lie on their side, then place the head of the stick under the surface, next put the middle of the stick over the spine; then set the ends of the stick against the other end of the head, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see this, turn the torment that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you shall insert two ties at the head of the patient's arm lengthwise, and towards the other ends, with space equivalent to an arm's width between each tie on both sides; and in each tie, one loop or turn is correct, and they are firmly placed so that they do not move. Between each pair of ties, there should be a turning tie at which the ligaments turn, and two small ties of an arm'e length to rotate the torment; then the master places the ligament between the joints towards one end of the torment as we have described, and the other ligament towards the ends on the opposite side, and each assistant turns their respective torment around all its ligaments.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are equalized, place the dried styptic with an abundance of wax, then the staples, and then the splint of a tablet III fingers long to support the site of the bone breakage and the healthy part of the spine, then bandage it with a ligature as we have said, and instruct the patient in subtle nourishment until they are well; and if anything arises at the end of their healing, administer medicines that soften and soothe, with the splint as mentioned before; and never apply a piece of lead, nor does the appearance come to the rear spine vertebrae, assuming it is dislocation; these are fractured bones for which there should be no presumption: perhaps it would cause their death.
des dislocations de la hainche	for hip joint dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Joints of the thigh and shoulder joints do not experience sprains but only dislocations, unlike other joints; the thigh joint is dislocated in four parts: internally and externally, front and back, more internally than externally, and slightly less so at the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation is such that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens up more bursae on the sick side than the healthy, so the patient cannot fold his foot over fire; and there are swollen lumps near an abscess due to the hip's head coming close.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those it comes upon by chance, is such that this accident is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those it happens upon, are such that they walk well with their legs in accordance; however, do not double over in pain at the groin, and if one wishes them to walk, they cannot beforehand, retains urine, and swells the ankle, and when walking, passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And s and thent; That dose ce que the test.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this type of dislocation is such that you may reposition it before the dislocation occurs, and it remains according to its nature, there is no need for treatment; and it does not require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh and there are four ways of dislocating it, quickly return to the joint, push it back and forward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return by itself, and requires no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return this way, then prepare a strong minister and secure the leg firmly in two bands or with a band that is wrapped above the ankle; another method extends its hand over it like placing hands under its heels, then grips it tightly with a thin band below the hip; others pull on the ligament. Extend all up and down once, until the patient is raised off the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases; if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If that is not the case, then attention must be given to its appearance when the dislocation occurs in the jawbone; it is necessary to support the patient on their chest with soundness, then place a ligature at the base of the thigh, and extend the ligature towards the groin, and upwards towards the abdomen; other assistants should hold its arms, and wrap the large area of the affected thigh, extending it forward properly: this will return to its place now; this method of dislocation is easier compared to others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in this way as we have described, then with a strong supple ligature bind both feet of the affected person together at the heels and knees, and keep the affected leg extended two fingers more than the other; then hang them from the head of a beam, and their arms long off the ground; then instruct an assistant to embrace the thigh's head, and have others hanging with the affected individual who will firmly embrace the thigh, as the joints return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is underneath, place the tiles so that they are correctly positioned on the affected leg and foot; then insert two wicks at the head and another between the toes; afterward, moisten the bandages around it without shifting the limb, then stretch them out toward him. The patient's counterpart places his hand in alignment with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is well-made (or 'good'). This refers to the successful repositioning of a dislocated
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place him on a board and press as we have described for the dislocation of the hip joint; position the patient's body correctly over it.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; then place the physician's hand on the painful side, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 If the dislocation is in the back, it does not require extending the patient's legs or lifting from the ground, but they should remain as if the hip was dislocated backwards during sleep on both hips; then placed against their face, and the limb extended as previously described, pressing must be applied to the joint at the table; when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; thus position the buttocks, place the cast, and wrap with a bandage so that the hip does not move; then rest for three days or four, afterwards release, and apply the cast again; if you see them are even, as before, leave it on for three more days.
de la dislocation dou genoil	De la dislocation du genou
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	I nternal and external displacement occurs in three ways: that is to say, within and outward, and behind; it does not displace forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 The signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it doesn't reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and in its restoration, have the patient sit upright, extend the limb as much as possible, place your back against their face, and put your foot under yours. Then take hold of his ankle with your hands, then slip between your fingers, then bend both shins formidably; other assistants extend the foot, until the knee joint returns to its place, and the sign is that it lightly touches the thigh; apply the plaster on top, make the leg fit snugly against the thigh for 3-4 days or more, then release it; and do not let the patient move about while ensuring comfort.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not functioning well, it should be strengthened greatly, as we have said in the treatment of the knee, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is at no time fully bent, nor fully straightened completely, but sometimes forward and backward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are such that the ankle is dislocated, and before reaching the part where it has been displaced: the reductions should be gentle, and one must gently extend with their hands once barely touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely displaced, one should make the patient lie down flat on their back with legs extended; then grasp the foot in your right hand, and then at the heel twice, then extend upwards firmly placing the foot above; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the treatment because it will return; and if it cannot be returned thus, make the patient lie on their back with their legs in between two people pressing firmly into the ground, a cloth around them to prevent movement of the body, then grasp the thigh, and other attendants extend the leg towards you or your line, so that another supports above the neck of the foot; then they should equally distribute the force using both hands, and the grip be maintained between the buttocks of the patient to hold still as the limb is extended; then adjust the splint at its original position with their hands, and other attendants place a healthy leg below, and dislocations will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 When it has reached this point, place the dressing and plug into it firmly, tie off the leg above the joint, and protect the tendons behind the ankle so that the ties are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, re-straighten; then remove on the fourth day or sooner, and prevent walking by four days; and if it moves before this period ends, it is not securely healed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes upon it, one must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
des dois	Of dislocations
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, they must be extended with ease of effort, and it is a simple thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any of your back or leg joints, it's necessary to have the patient sit upright or on a flat table and place their foot below these joints, then press firmly under their foot with two fingers; when it returns evenly, without anything protruding, put a splint beneath the sole of the foot, straighten forcefully, leave for three days, then remove. Let them rest until healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and needs to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not presume in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it long, unless you are compassionate, merciful, and slow; also cautious at first with soothing treatments for abscesses, and let the patient rely on God's hand if there is no hope of health; and when there is hope, reset the limb to its place now, as soon as the abscess heats up; and when the limb is in place, administer calming remedures for the abscess, treat the wound as needed with dried ointments; and if there is dislocation with fracture, and small bones are dislodged, follow what we have said in simple ailments; and beware of entering into fear's way, as I have said, for it serves you according to your creator, and for the healthiness of your armor and body.
Amen	 Hearken to fire c
