O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its explanation and concluded by its expositions and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this chapter, which is part of the work on hands, namely 'Surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and carried out everywhere, it has been neglected except for a few details from ancient books that describe what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus arises error and folly, and understanding is closed off, and wisdom has departed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I wish to revive this treatise with the arrangement of its chapters according to exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and also come together the forms of cauldrons for cautery, and other tools of the craft with the addition of preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters at hand in our times, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	It is necessary for those who undertake this to ascend in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of bones, their shapes and connections and separations, having knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and number of veins, and their movement and active and resting states.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so Hippocrates says that the unaided hand is very little, and with effort it is even less; similarly in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not attentive to what has been said before, be careful that they do not err and kill people; as I have often witnessed with some who undertake this science and abandon themselves without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	When I saw a mad knight who cut an abscess of scrofulous swellings or neck of a woman, and cut the vessels at its base; so much blood flowed out that the woman bled to death in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another knight who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a part of the bladder, and within three days, the man died from it.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called upon to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was to be cut open, he would surely die from it.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	This physician took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was also an injury; and the ignorant doctor reset the fracture on top of the wound at the proper location by firmly securing it, without leaving any gap, and left it in this state for some time; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again. It remained thus until the leg was completely healed, along with the foot, and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and hurried to dislocate the leg; and when it was dislocated so gently, he felt at peace and experienced no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the infection was already confirmed within the member and could not be healed; and the condition did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And behold I see another physician who fells an encrusted abscess, which then inflames due to the spite of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humors, does not need to be touched with iron unless in part its location allows for the removal of what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And thus, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place within this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Therefore it is necessary that you take care to ensure the foolish cannot speak ill of you; if you accept your weapons in contemplation, and embark on treatment for your maladies lightly yet firmly, using the best method so by God's grace you come to health and be praised; leaving behind diseases with grave sanitation. Take up your weapons because it causes doubt, and have faith within yourself that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galien warns in some of his admonitions: "Do not take ill diseases to care for, lest you be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire and medicinal cauterization wounds, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; including descriptions of swellings, ferrules for cauterization, and all necessary items in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The first of the cauterization and items from wounds are de laires de l’artemonginsions, and tos forms de ase.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head to the elbows, and the shapes of stretching.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So we shall remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of help and the harm of each composition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtle science and its secret responses; and on this topic, many wise ones speak and agree with it; but their words suffice little to me because I return in length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps in all constitutions where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions exist - those with hot moisture and those with dry moisture.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the constitution with both hot and dry moisture, some say that fire cautery is of great help, while others argue otherwise - that it only benefits diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to treat heat-related diseases by adding more heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise argue that fire cautery provides great help for both hot and dry diseases affecting human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the person and their moisture with the fiery temperament, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	t e times the m and heum: ESTTrafordnez par la oulez de.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the healers gathered and agreed on the treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cure, and even greater beneficence than burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	thed; Tap. ould that lesquilibtud: O.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medicines come from one limb affecting another, bringing severe diseases to the affected member; and often these cause death due to their potency and the goodness of their nature unless there is excess in them.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have discovered through experimentation and the extensive service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it lies in accordance with the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the lengthiness of my words, because I do not wish to take from you the secret knowledge on which or how this work operates, and the quality of its function, as explained by the philosopher when demonstrating; consider it well in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, when to perform the cauteries and praying lines.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all cases, because the damage occurring can be avoided by using cautery; especially when a necessary and urgent pain cannot wait for greater harm to come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the mad doctors; because a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are only medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and it works faster than other medicines due to its potency and power of its action.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the illness comes due to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; they are combined in him excesses from the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain relief, and other matters, so that no more pain returns; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine, and that's true; but they don't believe that cauterizations have value after medicine, their understanding is false, because when we administer treatment methods for any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply our cauterization, and it has value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then indeed cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider bronze as it pertains to the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the eye of a cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true as I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; surgical instruments of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed when you heat a gold instrument, it is not due to the color of gold, and it cools down quickly; if overheated, it requires fire; thus there are sufficient obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the iron cautery as we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil for anointing and healing purposes.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are for moisture and cold on the brain; there are two that are done because of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, as well as all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, stroke, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	sirlement.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with a cross between your hands, and place his hands on either side of the base; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever you see come his nerves, let it bleed first and then cool off the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the location marked with ink, and gently pull and twist your hand little by little; then lift your hand slightly, and return to the spot where you see a small bone protruding; if you do not see this, continue cauterizing until you see the bone as I have told you; afterward take some honey, place it in soft cotton inside, and put it on the location, leaving it there for three days; then apply fine linen soaked in butter; leave it until the scab is dry; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they say among the elders that when the wound is more open, it purifies better; and for this reason help yourself with salves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these say that one must thoroughly cauterize the part where bone is burnt and then repair what has been burnt off from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must cauterize sufficiently above, and push so hard as to bow the bone as wide as the wreath women put in their hairs so that humors flow out; and one should keep the open wound for a long time, after which it should be cleaned and bandaged.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases; except for certain people who have reason to fear. However, it seems to me that I should leave them alone, because the head becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs; and likewise when the head of a sick person is naturally weak, and the first sign of cauterization is more healing and effective for me, so I work accordingly with this method which brings together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ankle pain to severe headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain in all parts of the head comes chronically and lasts long, one must use years and pills called "cochie," as well as enemas, oils, and plasters; but if they undergo cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's headache is of a strong nature and not too cold; then you should apply cautery below the previously mentioned cautery, as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	; t. The 1 and so (thuser as far theirs.
dou cautere dou chief	Of fire cautery for the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends to its extremity, and the shoulder is purified by medicinal substances, and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, but they prove useless: then one makes fire cautery according to two ways, that is to say with quinces and with iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The quinces cautery is such that you take a piece of alchemy mercury and scrape off and cover two points with the same substance, then make the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the alchemy mercure from under the skin; and when it has been replaced properly and securely and left thus for 12 hours; and then loosen and cut along the alchemy mercury, leaving the wound like this for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter until pus is formed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the healing ointment is applied until it is cleaned; and if you see, take some of the medicinal substances I have written or mentioned in treating with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the form of that cauterizer:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole or has .i. small protrusion and resembles an eye; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron slightly until half of the expected color turns charred; lift your hand so that the tissue does not burn further behind, and let an abundance of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the ear for three days, and then putting moistened cotton with butter, afterwards treating the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellus', at all points, be sure not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the migraine as we have previously described in sections of diseases, and it does not work, and see that neither medicine nor iron is effective for the cautery as before mentioned, then it must be heated with the 'cultellus' type cautery until it is white; and thusly on the tender part of the ear, draw a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and let blood flow all the way to the bone; beware lest the lower jaw moves when eating, and nerves have no regard for it but only towards the migraine until spasms come upon the patient; and be wary of bleeding from the artery once cauterized if there is great fear or equal distress to those who are not aware and untried. But I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been cauterized, and I will show you where it opens at that place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness and the patient is suffering greatly, caulk within the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; if you see so, administer the cautery we have mentioned or in the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has .ij. knives; this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of ear pain due to cold air
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold air and one has tried solvent medicines and other treatments we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing everywhere around the ear, where either both sides hold pain and you remove the lump near the root of the ear once it has been touched; keep six points around each ear; then treat the area until it is clean.
de la torture de la bouche	For oral torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery for similar ones caused by pus and snake venom.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture that causes swelling from venom and cleansing purges, gargles, and such remedies are ineffective, then you should apply three cauterizations to the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a little forward on the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, directing it towards the top of the ear just below the tip, and another along the length of the temple as long as a piece; leave the cautery until half the skin is burnt off, this being the effect of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the kind of scraping we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after treating them as I have previously mentioned, until they are healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is present and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the two temple bumps, and one in the center of the head, and one at the location that we call "vessels" as we have previously mentioned, and another near the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large years and purgative pillow-moulds to cleanse the brain; afterwards shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place upon their occipital bone an astrolabe made of sinapis (black mustard), as prescribed in treatises on plasters. And this is how you perform the cautery: do so as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it proves to be so, well done; and if not, then do as follows: make three cauteries below the head extending down to the neck, with two fingers' width between each one, and treat them all similarly, and if you see that they are adhering together, create a fourth cautery in the middle. And if it is necessary, perform two more above the ears, and treat until it becomes well, as I have previously mentioned; this last cautery will be called an 'olive press', as I have before said.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be made smooth of years and what we have previously mentioned; after resetting the head for the patient, then perform caustication in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations above the spine of the back; leave it until as much skin has grown, then raise your hand; after treating so that it becomes healthy, and let be the caustication which we have called "olivare" previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Surgical methods should not be used on the patient unless they are phlegmatic; first, one must purify the brain with leeches and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical affliction.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, give them gargles and mastication to purify the brain often with good meats; afterward they will have their heads shaved, and .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessels, and above each horn; and if patients are very afflicted and suffering, give them cauterization as I have described to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine of the back and neck, and it shall be an olive cautery according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, give them a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted dampness and large phlegm, then the fire cautery of parts as we have told should be applied to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is moistly sick, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be cleansed, according to its state in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sick person is bandaged; after applying a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, placed on top of the head; and the patient's hair crossed evenly, and held firm from all sides; then present the ointment, and anoint with old sheep butter; and heat it gently over fire so that one can endure to pour the oil into it; after emptying the circle from inside the head, let it cool; and do this once a week to someone sickly with good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see to cauterize it by making various points on the entire cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This manner of cautery moistens the brain evenly; then place cotton wool in butter and linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	From the heat of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the heat comes first to the eyes as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and protects from all dampness, and they may sweat or take baths multiple times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to raise his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two small cauterizations over the temples where the nerves of the temple are together, or if it is one; wrap all vessels from the blood causticization and arteries that are below the crown, and let the caustic be long according to the width of the temple; watch for bleeding out of control, and if too much blood flows, stop with a dressing as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to dress it as you would; never do causticization or binding below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	In the body's tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, watery superfluities, then apply the caustic as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: i. a caustic on the head, ii. caustics above the two temples, and ii. caustics or haiterel under the two bones; and if more is needed, cauterize gently over the eyebrow with each small caustic.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Throughout the course of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nuis cochies to drink; afterward make a caustic on the head, and apply the hot oil caustic as well; and also two caustics of the clavicle-cautery above the eyebrows, one near the brows but not touching them; and beware not to clog up the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then you cauterize with this cautery called "olivary.
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is why this occurs:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the same spot as the eyelids are; do not leave your hand except until a third of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	and t they le Clavt y Comis quele ; by: it'issued them.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn to scales and touch the eye, and one performs cauterization in two ways: that is with fire or with burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; after securing (or binding) the eyelids with a figure so that it is similar to the feather of myrtle, and let the beginning sign be close to the hairs. Then put cotton wool smeared with egg white and musk essence on the eye, then heat this cauterization as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the area you have marked little by little, let the skin be healed at that spot; and the signs of health in the wound are when you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the height of an egg; then clean your hands, and leave so for iii. days, then apply a cotton ball soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterward treat with ointment until it is healthy again.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come in and the paper becomes soft as before, then resume the cauterization on that same spot; and if the hair is lost, continue cauterizing until the skin rises back to its natural place, evenly, without touching the original point.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization with hot medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment form of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and lively salt, each one in .З. ounces, and grind them well together quickly so it does not cool down, then sprinkle on the form as with myrtle leaves, and put on the paper; and if the illness is only in a single joint, you work with i.i., and in either of these; and put cotton balls into an egg yolk. And let the patient'n be well rested and place your two fingers showing under the medicine, and press .i. and lick every time when the patient feels mordacity from the medicine, as if it is biting like fire because.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, apply the medicinal bandage properly.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the inflammation is gone, raise the limb upward and return it so that if you see a swelling like one caused by fire or an incision, then it is well done.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, then reset the medicine on the limb or if the medicine has not worked, until your treatments are equal and your eyes aligned; then place moistened cotton wool in butter until the scab is closed, after which apply a liniment called "dyafenis" and another, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And you must carefully watch your treatment with great care so that the medicine does not harm the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 If the paper becomes weak afterwards, and the hairs prick at its root, resume treatment on that spot properly weakened by the paper, as you did before; after curing until it is sound again; this is the form of the sponge with mistery.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, be their constraints; and do not return them by the straight path for those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of treating a fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is proper for you to perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	the pudvous; but:s: bonstracz;
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the swelling and dryness; and if it is closed, work on the bowels; after applying a hot caustic substance, hold your hand to the part of skin above the oil so that your hands do not go mad; and place the caustic substance in the fat of the oil, and let it spoil.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you start the fire cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, continue the fire cautery once more if needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply a linen soaked in butter, and treat with drying ointment until healed, and after forty days when healthy, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; then follow as per your specific chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of fire cautery for anorectal abscesses, which none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Begin with an anal fistula and feel its location; then make a fine incision where the structure is as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the amount of a . З. of lead; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted to its proper shape; and it is necessary that on the oil you put cotton moistened with this or with egg white: if the lead fills the place properly, then it provides a marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, one must administer a blunt instrument to the anus, and return the fistula to its proper location in the body as required by its specific location.
des crevaices en levres	For ruptures of lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often occur cracks in lips which are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small lancet-like cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here for you have been the li que ite, and soignement dont cured in the next to the cauter les avies on l’ointe as they are treat et so the creter; that of the warts them healments as well: ce que vous m.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or near the roots of the teeth, after it has decayed and rotted and become old and turned into a fistula; treat it as we have described in divisions, but it will not heal: then you must apply .i. cautery according to the size of the fastole; after removing or opening the fistula, hold your hand until the wound is completely closed, and later too; do this once or twice more after the treatment we have described in remedies, until it is healed; if treated thus, it will be good. And if not, then you must expose the area and remove the decayed bone, according to what you find instructed in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Of the slight movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but to no avail, then place the patient's head in a clean spot; afterwards bathe the cautery so that its form will come shortly after, placing one end on a rag over the tooth; insert hot charcoal into the cautery quickly, holding your hand as the patient feels warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and resume the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, leaving it there for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner, the tooth that had moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held steady, and the moisture which was corrupted is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and medicinal remedries have no effect, then there is need for cautery in two ways: caulteries of butter and caulteries of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take a piece of butter from the cow, and shape it into a spoon made of iron or brass; then wrap cotton around the tip and cover with a tent cloth, causing the wool to stick in the butter; apply quickly to the painful tooth until cooled. Often repeat as long as its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; if you see that the butter-bound wool and cotton have hardened, then place it back on the painful tooth and heat with a hot iron until heat comes to completion under the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The fire cautery should be such that you grasp a needle of iron or silver, and it is thick enough so the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, place it where its shape will then appear, put it on the wound, and hold your hand until the cautery has cooired down; do this often, for the pain will be eased that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter during the process of that cautery, and then rub it in forcefully; and this is how you perform the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a fire cautery on any thumb you wish, according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the stitch.
des scrophules	Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofulous swellings are of cold humors and disobey medicinal digestion, then apply the cautery known as "cauterum secundum," which brings about openings for smoke to escape from the other side; place the hot cauterium upon the abscess once or however many times necessary until it reaches the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use a cauterium according to its size and leave it so for three days; then apply cotton-wool moistened with butter as long as redness remains. Afterward, treat the wound with ointments and tents until healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the vein:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When lymph nodes are swollen along the throat ducts, especially when it comes from a cold condition, then it is necessary for the patient to be bled first with soluble medicines; afterwards do caustic treatment at the root of the throat and guard that you do not come near the throat itself, but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward do another caustic treatment at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and be it the cautery called "clavile" which we have before mentioned; and heal the wound as we have previously said until it is healthy.
de la toust	When fever overcomes, administer a concoction for reducing heat within the body.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When diseases of the neck are cold moistors, and the patient has no fever nor thirst, and it is an early illness, make two cauteries on either side in the eyes' corners; and another cautery between the buttocks where they meet; and use the cauteries known as "clavile" according to the form which was mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see it, do caustic treatment by touching all the cautery called "points" which we have before mentioned in the illness of the ears; and let the points be until X or around that area.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the head as mentioned before, place the cautery thrice according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauldrons are lighter, as you make three from each one:
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding the shoulder joint dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset in place but cannot remain there, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation immediately.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient lies on their back and side; then lift the head inside the cavity of your left hand's thumb; and if the joint is dislocated, apply the heating rod with two nails at its end to shape it.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and heat the head to just above the ribs, using the heating rod with four nails at its end for shaping; this is achieved by caulking with the heating rod that has three nails, as the figures of caulking are these four rods; and each nerve corresponds to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the heating rod that has three nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it positioned on this nerve through which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery for scraping with a spoon; after allowing the patient to rest, do not move the limb for long periods until it is fully comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which event occurs rarely, then make a cautery on the hollow of the cauline joint or many cauterizations touching each other.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reduced, and bone is dry and patients are free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture until they reach its nature, and there are many catharsis for it, and by usual treatment methods it does not benefit, then patients must be made supine on their back, and stretch out their legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After this, make three fire cauteries above the chin for the amount of two ounces in total at each point, and four fire cauteries on both sides as long as the direction of the cauterizations is at three angles, with equal space between them so they are not connected when healed; and let the cauterizations be large enough to reach the parts inside by length. The appearance of the cauterizations should follow this form without being too close together.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see a large cautery on the stomach in this form; and for those who fear this cautery, perform additional ones by pricking above the stomach at that point according to the amount seen. Then continue with the cauterization called "points.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound we have had before, until it is healthy again.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver comes from pain due to cold and moisture and excess windiness, until it is restored to its natural state by reducing superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have described in divisions, but they benefit none. It becomes necessary for them to be nourished on their bedrest; and according to this method, placing three cauterizations using this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, avoiding near the hypochondria where the outline of the organ is located; with space between each cautery equal to a thumb's width. The cauteries should be long enough for the entire body and not press too hard at once; they are burned only halfway deep into the skin, and the patient lies down on their feet; if they cannot do so, they lie flat, extend their legs, and raise their arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 If you wish to do so, if the cauterizations are of a surgical nature, and you are skilled in this art, and you take care not to burn all at once because you would otherwise dry out the entire body; and ensure it does not reach the bubble, for the skin is very delicate in that area, and requires careful observation.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to determine if it's on the outer shell or within the tissue: if it's on the shell, the patient feels pain but not too intense; and if it's in the tissue, they feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment requires a resting of the wound, it is necessary that the patient lie on their head; and then lift up the affected area or abscess, and then heat the caustic which resembles an ember.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And with fire cauterization at the root until it is burnt through, and reaches to the syphysis, until all fistulas are closed; afterwards, according to the treatment of suppurations as long as they are healed; and it is not necessary that only those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine use this cauterization, by whose hands these diseases have spread at any time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it is difficult to work, and in every case it seems that he should leave the area undisturbed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	by [un su : (tir; you give meest odonz t fd’s:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should make pleurisy cauteries from aristolochia root in this manner: take an aristolochia root as long as possible, the longest you can find, and let it dry, making it as thick and long as your fingers; coat it with oil and hold it over fire to create a single cautery between the throat's edge and the neck, two small cauteries slightly descending on the part below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclined slightly backward; one in front of the feet, another above the stomacg, one between the shoulders, two at each side of the chest, without pressing too hard with your hand but rather openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancients said that no man should use the fire cautery as if it were a razor, and warm it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; and removes pain, as we have said in liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, as a fistula arises that cannot be healed.
de la mice	It seems like the text got cut off unexpectedly; it says "de la mort."
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease of those parts that we have mentioned in the sections on treatments, and it is not effective at all, then there are three ways of fire cautery, which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are two ways to make the cauterization: either do three or four in a line according to the length of the wound and following the figure of the liver cautery we have previously mentioned; and do not press all at once on each cautery, with the patient lying supine. Another way for cauterization is that you warm the cautery having two nicks as we have shown in shoulder dislocation treatment; lift the skin where the wound edges come from the left side, or where the sharp points of the injury face leftward, and make elevations as you lift the skin according to its size and the width of the body, with the cautery being proportional to the width.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After inserting the two inflamed veins until the core is pierced on the other side, and then using the cautery, thus there will be four; if you see this, cauterize with the entire cautery to three veins.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After curing when it has become congested over long periods, and this is as effective as the previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery does not work with epilepsy, only in the manner called "ascluyes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have discussed in sections, and your treatment does not work, then it is time to make four cauteries around the neck, one above the stomnch, one on top of the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the rear end of the genitals; the cauterizations should be close to the head that is mentioned.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery open for longer periods to purify, do not release the treatment of the sick person afterward; healing would be hastened, and both intentions would be united with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the caustic for the belly is to be a spatula as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be an olive, according to what has been placed there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the fingers are swollen in one who is yellowish, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the hand between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with caustic paste as you turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not insert too deeply, in this way it will constrict the yellowish swelling, and apply the caustic according to this form.
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on two legs two cauldrations in each leg at the ankle joint point; and let the cauldration be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cauldrations lengthwise so that bile can drain out; afterwards cure the other cauldrations we have mentioned.
de la menoison	For the treatment of menorrhagia: take three roes from a pigeon and two roes from a capercailzie, grind them in wine, then pour it into a bottle with sugar; this should be taken at every meal for a month. Afterwards, if bleeding persists, perform the following procedure:
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines flows out, it cannot be treated by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been explained here before about the cauterization of the stomach, where the cautery circulates; four subtle cauteries around the belly corresponding to one pointed cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of swellings
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When bunions are found at the foundation or one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have described in divisions, but it does not help, then apply caustic: III on the spine of the back, that which is all further than acupuncture points little by little in a triangular pattern, and I over each knee; and if you think its stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees swelling of the face, then apply a large caustic to the stomaturgical area as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another at the junction of all in a linear pattern; let the caustic be left for long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the limb until it is sound again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the black substance which is called "theleol"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you come to the joint, heat sufficiently the caustic which appears like a small razor, and then set it all ablaze on that joint being addressed; leaving your hand and the caustic at the origin of the vein until blood flows out from it, so causing little harm; do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large caustic on an inflamed area, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, we will discuss it in this chapter; if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by caustic treatment.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is an old fistula with decay and putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you must probe it thoroughly entirely, and be sure to know the extent of its front part throughout.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After cleansing the fire cautery that appears rusty, insert it into the fistula according to the amount of front part entered, and repeat the cauterization until the diseased and corrupted flesh is burned off once or twice as needed based on the amount of fat; and beware lest you damage any nerves therein, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the bladder and intestine, beware of these leaks, and do not leave it as if burnt charcoal, and think that they are none therein; after healing the limb until it is sound again, if the leakage is old, and the materials have been dry for a long time then know that the leak is entirely healthy; and if the materials have not dried out, reckon that the leak is swollen and corrupted at the front; and thus as one of these that we say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Concerning the illness of kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	The quidon les mallot li parfaits couvertes d’autre ne est s. 20s autres de ses maint liaut et desir. Et donc le ventrement la m'est, au tient lee avons sus ce que nos vauter eux reis de choses; and the cestez de lesc et, il soie; Estropes:
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to hold urine, then make a fire cautery in the area behind the bladaderies, where hair begins at the tip of the finger; there should be one on each hand, as long as we have mentioned. There shall also be one on the back if needed; and the fire cautery shall follow the form previously described.
de la marris	Of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed endings; when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary tract cautery, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauliflower-shaped cautery be made as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous veins descend to the hip bag, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lion's share of the testicles is found in the departure region, so you must cauterize the patient with one caustic resembling a circle on the hip bag, and mark before the groin within the circle, ensuring that the bag is inside the circle; and let the cauliflower-shaped cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three large olive oil-based cauterizations, and the cautery should be as close together as possible like all keys; apply the cautery until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Pain of the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in division and treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the sick of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good pills that appear similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing the cautery; and there are two ways to do it with cauterization: that is to say, combined with burning medications, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cauterization has many methods among which one is as follows: you should make triangular cauterizations over the hinge bursa using three cauterizations following this pattern, and ensure good depth and width, with space between each cauterization about the size of a pea, and use olive-shaped cauterizations; nevertheless, one should not make cauterizations in the middle above the head of the joint, which is why it follows this pattern:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterization on the circular cautery as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it so that the circle contains the entire thigh and all the space around its curvature is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And that is how one treats sciatica when the pain occurs in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make the caustic at the place where the patient says that the pain holds him, with four caustics above the ankle on the left side; and be the dressing in vinegar, and dry as much thickness of wax as needed; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three fingers' breadth below the knee or near it, cauterize at the place where he feels the pain with either three or four points on the caustic called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If it is necessary to do so and if the pain increases; and if it seems that the pain moves from above the knee towards the thigh, then perform a cautery using either an ear-spoon or circular caustic, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave behind either the caustic used or damage to nerves and major arteries, causing further harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I have seen some who made caustics on the ankle below the knee, and they continued until the leg was fully inflamed, with the bone also affected, which were pierced and consumed entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a treatment of the stomach which causes death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise men say in the thigh's fire cautery, as follows, make it of iron and be at its head as large as one big finger or slightly smaller, with intervals and from the first interval to the other a quantity like a nutmare, half an ounce; and let there be two halves, evenly spaced, and also rounded, and have a well-made handle, which is the shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	First bathe it until all is red and sticky-wet, then place it on the pouch of the affected leg, and twist with the sound ribs; and cauterize once using a hot iron rod and leave for three days; then apply beef suet, and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; after applying ointment until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few are seen using it; however, this is a good cauterizing method that can be endured, where one finds comfort.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The fire medical instrument is such that you make an implement with intervals where the edge of the gate descends, and it's made of iron or brass long enough, and at its top has two knobs, and between each has the size of a pea; and they are overturned upward and outward, and join together as in this shape.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the poultice on the patient's lying hip near their raised side, and pressing your hand firmly over the poultice of the hip; afterwards pour between the two rings of hot wax that are heated in a pot by fire, allowing it to rest for an hour, while letting the patient endure the heat and dryness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For there is also inflammation as from fire; and when the inflammaturgy has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip, leaving it so for three days, and apply butter until what appears black from bruising turns white; and leave this way of treatment to heal for another three days.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that follows as you did in the hinge similarly; and it is the manner of hot plastering, which I have written or treated on the correction of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take an equal amount of alkali and quicklime together, grind them separately, and put in a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 If there is not enough space for the point of a razor to enter; and place another well-leaded pot under it, then put alkaline and quicklime above, ensuring you have two handfuls over the powders as finely ground as possible by your hand; leave thus until it descends with warm water from the leaden pot, then take all that plaster, pouring over chalk and again into alkaline.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very painful and managed through various medical works and other member cauteries because it performs the same work as before, and if with other medicines which are well cauterized on the heel like tarsier and honey carduus and wax with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galien tells us about a cure wherein an honorable man was healed of the pain in his heel and sciatic nerve, and it greatly helped him; and he said that no other treatment was given, and he recovered once when this cure was done, and then he bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner to pluck the fresh and dry litargium plant, grind it very well with a bit of fat, and apply it on the heel and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours or as much time so that the patient no longer feels burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter a bath until the body is somewhat refreshed, and make it lie down to rest, and the pain will leave completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And understand that no one should use fire cauldrons of such medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscurides says that when the sciatic vein is cauldriformed by goat intestines, it greatly helps; and the cauldrons must be made in a particular manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it over the pit between the thumb and forefinger and the other called phoscoil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Then take dried goat intestines and hold them over fire until they turn to charcoal, and place them on the linen, leaving it there until it turns black; do so repeatedly, continuing this method until you feel that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain ceases; and these methods of cauterization are called "cauterization with goat intestines.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or like cold matter expanding, none of these cases call for cautery unless it is someone who has taken in cold substances.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other similar substances, make them lie on their back where the pain is located. Three lines marked with 'X', and in each line, 5 cauldrons or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and perform the cauterization as per the cauldron called "points". If you see this: do 3 caudrons or 4 at the clavicle midline according to this method.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes in young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they stand up, and fear; and you find at the base spine of their back and above the appearance that comes across other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and examine it, apply the fire cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If the fire cautery aligns each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see it, use a hot iron around the spine with a pointed instrument making two or three lines, and they should be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the wound until it is whole according to what we have said, be careful not to perform caustic treatment in an area of thickened tissue that contains a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	On the treatment of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is from moistures that have spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which those called 'gout' properly, and when it is caused by coldness and remedies cannot heal it, then they are treated with caustics thus: make a ring of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustic be olive-shaped in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to hold the face down towards the ground, make sure to perform caustic treatment all over with a hot iron marked "no point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains reach to joints and other joints, which often happens, make caustic treatment with three or four caustics on each joint of a hot iron; and if more is needed, do so, but do not hold your hand too close until the desired color appears.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, treat it with the fire cautery as we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make marks around the wrist; and if there is no pain at the elbows, mark on each joint and hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the edges or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and give him medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of them and purge phlegm, they will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the treatment for scrofula
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the sucking custom causes swelling and veins protrude anew, then when you see it to be healed, do not let them pass by without action that day; and use things that ease their stomachs so they can expel from their belly; afterwards sit on one's back between the hands, and command them to rub oil until the veins are repaired, and massage your arms, and give a gentle push under the sucking area over the bone of the wrist, and make any sign resembling half a circle above their body; then prepare the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and tastes sweet.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then relocate the bones to their original place; and instruct him to keep his hand bandaged so they do not return backward; work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cloth and serge underneysse over the thighs, and another beneath the feet which he can use to tie up his hands; then apply the fire cautery over all your fingers, and straighten the bone as much as you reach the joint, and if you do not reach it on the first try, continue again until you reach the joint; be careful that the bone does not protrude when you perform the cauterization; do not burn it; and by this care, the patient will not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach up to the bone with the cautery, your works are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and large people also proportionately; after three days healed by butter until the burn has hardened; then with other ointments until they are healthy, and let the patient lie on his back 40 days until the wound is well-healed; and it must be that nourishment be taken for a long time so that sores do not break out when he begins to walk.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after amoled days, when he wants to get up, he must have a well-made bandage and wear it for 40 more days; and have good rest, that he works little and watches against too much drinking and eating, and loud crying; and once he has completed this instruction, he is fully healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of tailors in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the abdominal pain treatment.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 And when routes come into other bellies and become known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make I the fire cautery according to its amount, and leave it one-third of length; after the treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 But first mark the head of the enge and make a line for the width above the route, and another below, and keep your hand amidst all the fire cautery pointedly.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first fire cautery is lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain persists for a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it should be cauterized with a caustic called "poins", according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, power, location of twists, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is near the first caustic, that's good; if not there, begin with another caustic on top of that one, as custom dictates that it should move to the part of the limb closest to it, so you must make the caustics until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Messelecy or massage therapy
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The pain has been eased any number of times by caustics with great help, especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see the need to cauterize, take care if the disease is at its onset, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither recedes nor persists; and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the entire illness, then make two cauteries above the head: one near the nape of the neck, and the other toward the end of the hairline at the forehead; and [make] two more on the temples, and one behind the ears; let your fingers with the hot iron come close to the bone until scabs form from which vapors of thick humors can escape; and cauterize according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the swelling is widespread and clearly visible, it is necessary to perform cauterization with the cauldrons we have mentioned before: one at each corner of the head, two on the spine along the neck, five on the spine down the back, a large one over the navel and another nearby; two on both shoulders, two on the hip bones, two on the tendon of the ankle, one above each joint in hands and feet, and below the palms' pits; beware not to burn any nerves running along behind it; never cauterize directly over a bone such as the knuckles or stomach, nor liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more caustic treatments you apply, the greater assistance it provides, and benefits the patient; and understand that the afflicted do not feel pain from caustic treatment as the healthy ones do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it must be that the caustic treatment is large and small according to the members and joints, depending on what you find in handling iron rods.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing them with a poultice of wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until they are sound.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When inflammation occurs in any limb, and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it's not sound yet, then you must apply caustic treatment to the limb according to its size; let the caustic treatment be slightly reddish like skin color. After that, treat with oil until it becomes healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 At no time has cautery been done on the hand and foot and back, where a nerve causes immobility of the limb, thus causing inflammation; and in any case it does not involve anyone unless they are familiar with the members and pathways of moving nerves within the body.
de albaras	The use of cautery to address swelling in specific areas necessitates careful application based on the affected limb's dimensions; a slight penetration into the skin is advised for visibility. Subsequent treatment should include ointments until healing occurs. Additionally, cautery has been applied to extremities and spine locations associated with nerve function that can lead to bone deformity when not properly managed; however, intervention in such cases should be avoided unless the practitioner is knowledgeable about muscle functions and neurovascular pathways within the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then apply cautery slightly with a cautery according to the quantity of color change; so that the blueness turns white, and the color changes; then treat with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves juice, along with bull testicle blood and duck's blood, each part by part; and mix it all together, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the place until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a sore begins to appear and you can see it, cauterize with the cautery that appears as a circle all around the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And yet the surgeons say that you should also make a circle around the sore with the cautery; however, I do not think this is good because I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and have never seen any success from such practice; moreover, it would be better to apply the cautery all around using what we call the "circular" technique as mentioned in many of our treatises.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die out
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays dying either due to excess discharge or because of the state's impact on the patient when they are very old (that is, too weak) with little blood, or because of time; and you see them near death: then cauterize around many small caustic burns by holding; afterwards leave it as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For she will delay dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery of which there is a shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the midst of that illness called "adubeati" until it feels like burns, and let the caustic burns be such that the patient senses them behind as if following the course of inflammation.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another manner of disease called "corrodens," which is nothing but a mixture affecting the limbs, as it consumes them like dry branches are consumed by fire.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease present where it may be helped by burning with fire, then apply small and large cauterizations as appropriate to the location or nature of the illness; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated all corruption, leaving nothing remaining that what is corrupted not becomes an ulcer.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it rest for three days and apply wet compressions with oil until the burns from fire have healed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying oil treatments that produce heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that the wound is not healed, it's good; and if not, resume the fire treatment on those places still infected by foreign matter.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this mixture has never been treated with medicinal leeches near the fire cautery; however, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment with medicinal leeches in that section: take what you need from it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of pus that comes to the joints.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often in the feet there arises a disease which we call "clot" and it is a significant swelling that presses on the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the fire treatment for this disease is as follows: two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is known as fire cautery, and water cautery hot.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 It is that you heat the fire cautery, and water cautery in such a way as to be like a pen of lead, and it should be made of good iron so that it can pierce through all parts, and that it has fine edges; after heating it up over the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the point on the nail; leave it thus for three days until pus begins to drip; then make an emollient of mashed savory herbs with wool, and let the emollient stay overnight, and the nail will draw out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the limb with soothing ointment until it is healed cleanly.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if they are transformed by further use of the method, and it occurs many times in hands and feet, then you must apply cauterization with hot water; and here is how: take an iron nail or spoon, or a wooden pencil, and place it over the bump, that is for warts; put the metal on so it presses all around, then add some warm water, hold your hand firmly, and keep pressing as you turn so that the edge of the item reaches to the root of the bump, allowing the hot water pathway deep up to the root; let the patient endure a bit of the sting from the hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will detach completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do another after the other, touching all that are on the body, then treat them with ointments containing wax.
li cure dou trembler	them on; This is not to: est untines a la chauges until the be it. The time that tand rele your de ouga:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shivers from coldness of nerves or fever quartan or other, it is necessary that you make them four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra; and one incising and binding, and another near the stomach with an olive oil caustic. This will cease their shivering, and restore health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 In no case become apparent from behind in bodies bathed or pus-filled, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If necessary when they appear that you perform a cautery on each head of the pus-filled: a subtle cautery from an ashwood stick, wherein the point is hardened by fire or from the root of aristolojo longa, or with a concave cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And do not cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but it breaks the excess from which they come, and are cleaned; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times it occurs that great blood flow from an artery cut to the wound on the surface or during abscess incision or member caustery, and similar things; and it is a very grave thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when it occurs to anyone, hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and strain very hard until the blood is calmed below your finger, and ensure that no more flows out; then put olive oil causterys both small and large as long as they are all red; then take some, either great or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery above that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	When it bursts out as you lift your elbow over the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do one after the other until the wound is closed; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other illness comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly close it on your own if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or by strongly twisting a thread, or by medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and be glued and strained simultaneously.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will perform the proper closing of straining tightly with cloth or applying burning substances above, or similar things; if it does not benefit greatly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger under the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it out until blood remains on top of the wound and vein; do not move it, but frequently moisten it with cold water so that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops flowing; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatment methods.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have told you in the first chapter, all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, causes, extracts, and forms of cauters; and I placed this chapter up to the fingers, and I will proceed with this chapter through the same path so that one finds it easier.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, hence greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you to not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For there are many ways that people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 if come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die easily due to the severity and magnitude of their disease; and one must have fear for these cases.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among them are those who regain consciousness, saying "wait, I am awake"; and their disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting for you to consent to those who come to you with such conditions, but rather place greater emphasis on your honor than your greed, and do not act rashly but wisely regarding what you are certain of and have learned from experience; employ prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted, and this will aid you in acheboring good reputation, glory, and memory for a long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son of our lords, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as seen in the chapter of cauteries that I have explained from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water within the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this illness often occurs in children being born, and when the sack exerts too much force on the child's head; there has never been a case where it was not caused by this.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in beasts other than children, and of all those that I have observed it hastens death; therefore, I deem it worth mentioning the treatment section separately.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	en son's tre ;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is too much moisture and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone and the signs you see are at the joints over the top of each part, and it feels like water when pressed with your hand inside, and has not been reset: then it must be cut into three incisions according to this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision, remove all the pus thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After straining the tears of cloths and powders, put wine and oil, and leave like this until the fifth day; then loosen it, treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and allow the head to drain evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to examine where the head of the abscess lies and its water content; for it's never in front, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Thus cut where the abscess head is and its water content according to your ability; be careful not to puncture an artery, ensuring there is a flow of blood so that the patient does not die from bleeding or loss of moisture.
de reume	To restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is to perform cauterization with the tool used to tie off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you see the wound covered, instruct the patient to raise their head; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the collar from all linens; then examine if there is bleeding around both ears, and only a little has been reattached; then sew up the edges of the incision, using a thin strip on each side, until it reaches the bone, and the wound heals across its width.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, tie off the artery with a stitch from above and cut it just as two points cross over.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is opened, blood flows continuously from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the artery does not open by touching, one must measure the amount of space for three fingers, then tie off and cut until reaching bone; and what is required in blood to be put outside is six ounces, with some more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if it does not remain below the bone, nor do abscesses appear, then strain the wound and close it up, and apply ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	From gouty inflammation
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When gouty inflammation comes early and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and such things occur, if it is treated by various medical methods of medicine and nothing benefits him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have discussed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient should have their temple hairs shaved back, and listen for the pulse of the artery which opens in the temple, because it beats clearly and heals quickly compared to some men who are too cold; and if it recovers, strain a bandage on the wound from the patient using rough fabric, then rub the area with warm water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatula like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then scrape the skin gently until you reach the artery, then tie it off with pincers and bandage well above each part; if the artery is delicate, twist it at the tip of a needle, then cut according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If not properly reduced, it will never regain full function again at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And tie the blood of the five veins until three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind them in two strong threads of silk twisted together so that sores do not come before the wound's closure, and running bleeding does not occur; then sew up any excess between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with a cautery knife to the bone as long as the veins are tied off; this is the proper work, provided that the patient has no fever and is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For caustics aid in finishing wet wounds; thus they are of greater help to wet wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, fill the area with fine cotton and place well-made bandages; and when they are removed, treat them with dry medicines that promote healing, and use dressings until it is healthy; and if there's a lack of blood flow from where you work on it, quickly cauterize using hot iron or fill the area with vitriol and strain using your hand so that it becomes unblocked; and if not present, apply cold water to the site until numbness occurs, cool the area with cold water until congestion clears, and restrain as necessary; and those easier and lighter in artery extraction are cauterized at the vein of this sharp caustic iron (cautery) with two parts, but ensure the edge is well dulled to last longer against heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when inflammation is too hot, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And when it is two spaces between the points, and then you must have a heated until to the bone, and cleanse the vein for both sides, and they are far from the veins; and bevelled on both sides. And so that there is this caustic cauterize:
des larmes	By tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of eyes run down into veins near the forehead's upper part, and no medicine helps when administered there, you see the patient's face grow red like frightened flesh; and if oil is applied and moist enough that hair strands fall out, leaving burns from the heat of the tears, such treatment may be necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 It was formerly called "cure contuse," and you should treat the patient who has this condition by trimming the hair on his forehead, then making three cuts or evenly spaced depending on the length of the forehead; one cut to be as deep as halfway down the forehead in a descending manner up to the bridge, while the other two are at the level of the cheekbones above the temples. Be cautious not to incise any arteries located at the same level of the cheekbones above the temples; and extend your hand along the continuation of the lower jawbone in length, making each cut as deep as three fingers wide. Prepare a piece of sponge and several layers of cloth for applying pressure to stop the bleeding, then apply steri-strips on two parts where the incision will be:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all flesh that is between the two cuts until it reaches the sphenoide bone, then make another section from the middle incision up to the other end, and then extract this cautery stick.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "culterale" in the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, but also soft so not cutting, and that is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the bandage cutting toward the chest near the heart, and the ribs soft to the bone, and continue until it reaches the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And tie all vessels that arise from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens near the heart, then in the middle crack to the other opening; then extract blood equally and express the point for captured blood; then place a tent of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil and balm, ensuring no sores arise; on the third day loosen the ligament, and anoint it with abundant fresh water, then apply salve of basilicon mixed with rose oil, as well as other treatments for wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eye sockets
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When frequent cases of eye sockets become swollen and small, and sight weakening the vision, and eyelids burned; and hairs falling out, and it causes great pain in frontal headache, and individuals suffering from such ailments are often caused by these conditions that this blindness but they arise from various venereum; and treat so beware of, and therefore cure, and thus:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you command the sick person to turn their head backward, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one twice as wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 Begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make incisions all the way up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves near the temples when they move while eating; and once the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, then wrap between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool, and try to stop the bleeding; afterwards cover with clean cloths soaked in wine and oil, and protect from heat-induced pus formation; if it becomes infected, you must rub the bone until growth begins, then treat with things that cause discharge, which helps heal.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts wax, and mix them together to form an ointment; apply it to the wounds for overall healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, pieces of mineral or similar substances; seeds, as in pods, peas, beans; or fluids flowing like water and easily passed, such matters.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it bleeds in the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows within the ear, then set the ear on the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, and if any drop of violet oil or ointment is secreted, then perform extraction; and it causes a condition to sneeze, and plugs the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and places pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; then raise the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often it occurs by this treatment; and if it does not occur naturally, then prepare for delicate incision with tweezeburner instruments:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it has improved with tweezing, that is good; if not, arrange for extraction using a small delicate double-ended forceps; and if it still does not improve, make an incision at the top of the opening or keyhole in the ear canal, and remove any wax buildup so that nothing can enter with the swab. Then treat as before, because often this brings improvement as we have said; but if there is no such improvement, take a substance like birds use, and insert it using a precise instrument of some sort, then place a small cotton at the opening; then press gently on the stone or whatever it may be, and treat as before.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If none of the issues we have discussed occur, then quickly fracture the ear before an abscess appears or a swelling arises, and spasms; the manner of the fracture is such that you first comfort the sickly in his head, drain the blood according to its strength, then make him sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, creating a small fissure at the root of the ear where fat or tissue lies; let it be as a crescent until reaching the bone, then set the bone as much as you can, and squeeze out with haste into your mouth; cure until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a stone that exists and swells, make a careful extraction; if it cannot be removed, then create a fine tube according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And perform an incision on that stone.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do so when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many attempts; then extract with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction be smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Once the grain has thus entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with a first conditioning, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And be careful on that same ear where he is afflicted.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it falls out by itself, this is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not fall out by itself, then take many small and light stones according to your judgment, and scald them slightly with fire; then place the patient's own hair in his ear, and let one side of a stone slip through from there on another side, and drive into the stone inside the affected ear; continue inserting stones until all grain is expelled completely. Thus, it will fall out entirely; if you see this happening, take a small stick, put one end of it in the ear while burning the other end until it becomes less hot; then make another incision with different stones until all grains are removed as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	For extracting the object, if it is of small size, like an insect or similar thing, treat as we have described in the section on removal; but if it is large enough to be felt, then arrange for extraction using forceps; and it is easier to remove whatever has entered into the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	For removal of artresir. se sont que l’oreille qui coure par le tennis tu l’oreille ne vuidier despiroire les tiers mains, et li mors sainsirs a l’a piere as ourtre tost; si condeuoir: la nostredes de li traits securer cestres ce, qui est coure en le curez auir la ou il sient despiere estrils sonts tennent maint quater les orle tout li.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it must be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And insert the thinner end into the ear according to the amount of pain in the patient, then gently press it all the way through; do this often until all hairs come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out as instructed, puncture around the cotton-filled canal as I have described in the stone; and if they still do not protrude as we have said, then perform dilutions that the ancients have tried in the incision of worms, and you will find or treat them with distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, thus is its form as you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It is made of silver or tin narrowed behind and widened in front for distillation; and to press the distillation through an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose, if you see a needle then wrap it with cotton at once; then pour your oil or juice, and as much of your medicines into the canal, so that the canal is in the ear; then insert all the cotton around the needle completely until the oil has been distilled or comes out from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and make sure the distillations are kept warm as when they are distilled in the ear; and ensure they are not too cold, for otherwise the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any deformities in their ears and the same thing happens to adults through wounding or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these injuries occur fully within the ear such that one cannot see them; and sometimes there occurs an imperfect perception of sight while hearing remains good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore if it comes inward and cannot be seen, it often requires thorough healing in various conditions, and when you can see it, make the afflicted ear lie to the sun; then look inside: if there is apparent inflammation, the work is on this area where the form lies.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be thorough and cutting before and behind all plainly, if it does not blister the ear; if the inflammamen is of a foreign object or body parts within the ear, then take with fine pincer-like tools, and clean lightly, until everything has been removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the swelling is found in the ear, take a fine and delicate razor and dry it slightly over fire, then return the body of the ear to its place.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If the patient feels swelling causing trembling in their hearing, puncture lightly and ensure not to press on the nerves of the ear; then put a bandage in the ear according to the size of the hole, and apply ointment with Egyptian powdered myrrh.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound for any day until it is closed, then you take a tent and apply an ointment with rosewater, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see discharge from the ear, replace the tent and move another greased tent made of rosemary oil and wax until inflammation subsides; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and wrap in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood discharge such as distillation therapy.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This paper when it comes from the rolls as they are wet and dry, one must stretch them with tongs and clips, then cover it with a paste made from its roots; afterwards place it in lime water solution.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it cannot be stripped away, then with the delicate cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is made, often many times they do not remain on their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and will not return.
de la gresle	les que he as a l'ard; that t s;t; puis quivide le ; theta; J.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times paper comes to the eyes something that appears gritty in form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "grandine" (hailstorm), and it is a large amount of moisture on both sides of the skin; the treatments are as follows: take care if hailstorm occurs from one side or another, and it's an easy thing to know; then make it wide, then carefully scrape off each part, then grasp with tweezerenets, and bandage.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot pull it apart without piercing the paper slightly, nothing will harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, join it with a suture, and treat until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply force, for the ointments will soon restore it and cause scarring.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending into the inner ear and towards the upper part, reverse the paper, extend the hail with pincangs, bandage and press from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, nothing harms it; and when the hail is healed, wash the area well to prevent scarring until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	And wash the wound thoroughly with water and soap to prevent infection.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Eczema is an oily substance that arises on the skin and paper, occurring mostly in children but also in some adults; it causes great distress to their eyes, they develop cataracts by morning, and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; hence they lie with their faces downwards, sleeping like this, and their papers are moistened under the swollen eyelids that have an opaque appearance due to eczema.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you apply pressure to the joint with your hands, feeling something pass through inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the treatment is that the patient places his head on your hand; then take a linen cloth and make a tent shape in a circle according to the amount it contains from each exinach part, then place it over him; press with both thumbs on either side so that the exinach are gathered within the circle; then create a slit in the moisture at the sharpest point of the blade, and it should not be wider than the wound made to the veins. Cut through the skin until you reach the exinancium; and in various positions comes exinaccium from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove with your thumb and turn the cloth to either side until it is spread out; keep your hand turning left and right until you do not get stuck in the incision, don't let any of the blade up to the oil, so that he doesn't cut too much.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the nail does not pierce at the beginning of the cut, gently widen the incision until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten with linen and water, and place on the wound, and bandage tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for those men who grind and place them there to spoil the moisture that has lingered.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the healer treats it until it is sound again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes to a head, then the healer treats with warm plasters until it is sound again.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from paper strips
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs sprout on paper in ways other than their nature and age, they harm the eyes, leading to familiar diseases such as tearing, weakening of the papers, and scurf until it causes destruction of the eyelashes; the treatment follows four methods: by cauterization with fire alone, or by ague medicine according to its specific chapter on cautery, and can be done either by incision and suturing or by pledgets, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the chief of the eye in your right hand and then turn the paper with oil towards your left; if it turns well, that's good; if not, insert a needle through every thread on top; and do so near the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull one thread across the entire paper, turning it to its edge; then make incisions into the area below the paper, below the displaced hairs, all over the spatulated coatings from the great corner to the small one; then extract a thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen fabric underneath the paper, then suture it with an incision pattern like that of a marten's fur, making sure the stitching is in accordance with the amount you see elevating the displaced tissue.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is a portion that needs to be clipped off in great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper has softened; then treat all the affected area within the lines you have marked, beginning with the larger part up to the smaller; and make one of the two cuts near natural hair growth on the swelling of a root, then tie the string into one of the two corners at the edge, then scrape it off entirely; then stitch both edges together using a single thread from a fine needle, and drain the blood, and trim any excess threads around the eyebrows as much as possible, if you can do this; and if not, don't bother about it, leave the sutures and threads until three or four days. Then treat the wound without stitches and tighten with drying agents, because the paper will regain its position due to the healing of the wound and joining together again, but the suture is movable (as ancient texts say), and it's a task without worry; and if there'cu another way: and that you shape the paper into a figure as similar as possible to a marten trapper's bag, as we have described, with three ties corresponding to the form shown here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cover what supports the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the object is not level, then take a needle with thread on it, and place it within the wound; and wrap another thread around the large edge, and the second thread around the small, and join together both threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and gently lift all flesh surrounding where you made the incision, as we have explained, then stitch the two edges of the wound closed, and let it heal until sane; if an abscess appears at your incision site, soothe it with cerote and soothing ointment; and sometimes it occurs that the hair from the paper is not inverted: in such cases, you must follow what we have said about making the incision; however, both stitching methods are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of fistulae is thus: and you convert the parchment and make them dense according to what I have said, then make two incisions with a sharp instrument as long and wide as the parchnament and the width of the gutter; and tie off both ends or where you hold the threads; then carefully join each part together beneath the parchment on top of oil, and suture the two cuts from each side properly; and leave it so for several days, and the skin that was sutured will die, shrink, and heal, until it fully closes.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed and the wound is inflicted by force, then treat until it is cleaned; and if the wound is sutured together quickly, and the paper dressing raised, with no more hair growing there; and you must make the shape of two cannons as shown in this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Take the operations such that you choose a fine needle, and insert it with a thin silk thread; then align the heads and carefully adjust both subtly so their lengths are equal to one palm in length; then arrange in the case another short, fine silk thread, and pass the needle through the first thread; then place the patient's head on your bench; and position it close to the sunlight so that the operations can be seen clearly, for they are subtle and small ones; then insert the needle completely into the root of the hair near the skin, and pierce the paper hastily as you draw along the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the case, and place in it the same hair if there is one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until all the hairs run through the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the case has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the case back from all the thread that you have arranged until the opening is exposed; then you will draw both the case and the thread, and leave open two or three days or more, so that the hair grows in its place and a scar forms; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with it, raising it together until they are sufficiently separated, and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	And when you can be thread after them that case, and soil not too much oureatement the place until sile tooth a tides of time or long; et leli the filz, as the dents hairs the luex. 5 days.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "aleacrari" or the swelling occurs in the eye, if it is of two types: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens by sudden injury, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of treatment is to cut through that suture, separate its edges, and place lin threads inside it; keep it clean until it heals. And one should not use anything drying or constricting in its care.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it works like softening agents, as fenugreek does; and a mixture of water or vinegar and flaxseed seeds cooked, and unguents dissolved in any kind of oil, and then applied with bandage, and treated by such means.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of this treatment is that you must ensure it does not heal in its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely for addressing this disease so it does not return to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the chariot entering the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness that is truly called "axacrati," is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and splits and cautery and similar things; and the way of treatment is such that you sew with an awl, which has double thread, and the needle through the hole to the left until it reaches right so that both threads come out at the top of the eyelet; then insert the eyelet above all the needle, and use a thimble wide enough.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that's good; if not, take scissors and place them in the cut, then adjust the paper, making two slits or creases within the paper; let the head be at the two angles of the incision you have made, so when they are joined, the shape is like that of a letter with an 'n'; then remove that piece, according to the amount needed for the edges to come together and secure the paper, and place the severed parts close to each other, stitching them with woolen thread; then apply the remedy as we have mentioned using softening medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a fracture or suture or cauterization, it is proper to make an incision cleanly over the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said above; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise means in all they can do to return the figure to its natural shape; and patients likewise, according to what must be done with work and treatments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	In adherence to the paper's method
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching occurs on the paper in such a way that it is sealed with the egg whites of an oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then one must place the tip of a razor underneangs the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it out, as much as you scrape off what has been sown into the delicate spot beneath, which should not be too rough nor too sharp so that the patient cannot endure if the suturing is too aggressive or too blunt, then make your incision shall cut through this gathered area slightly; and it should be removed in its natural form; and all that healed, no times with dirty water, but use clean water, and soften, and collagen; then place a tent of flax linen, and put on the oil, and moistened by using water.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It is said that the nail has two manners: one nervous and similar to a hard sore, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moist blisters; when touched with iron and cooked in pincers, it cannot move. Both resemblements begin near the eyebrow and grow gradually until they cover the entire vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of the incision is such that the patient places their head in pain relief position, then you work on the nails. Take paper to your hand, and cook the nail with pincers; gently warm it. Then take a needle, thread a hair from a horse, goat, or cow through the tip of the neede
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch and break the flesh layer, and that the pliers are not pierced; after making an incision, pour some egg into it with a cloth soaked in litharge, and leave until the next day; then treat as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not fit in, many times this resembling of a nail has been treated with medicines; they appear as described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the patient's pain, and take a light spatula slightly according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently lift the nail above and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason is pressing on, distill from your mouth into the oil syringe made of litharge, and with a red straw and cloth wick, continue to treat until the next day; then resume another treatment according to this same method, until it is completely gone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no other matter opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then first treat the abscess until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh near the elbow troubles you greatly in your work, suspend it on a hook and cut part but not all, so tears do not reach there; then let red-colored oil distilled with lead leak into the area.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the hair that grows over the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 For some individuals are born with red hair, covering the forehead and tying back papers and turning towards prosperity; and the practice is such that patients keep their heads upright before prayer, then work on the hair, and cover all those who correspond to convents suitable for this, and support it with strength; then cut the first hair, and shave completely down to the end, and ensure you do not irritate during treatment; and make an incision with a slender spatula as we have said in the incision of nails and small forces by which one removes sebum, just as it appears after this practice shows results; and when the incision is complete and all hair is removed, apply oil mixed or dripped through a red woolen cloth, with abin dew poultice if certain of heat-causing abscesses; and if anything remains, and the patient becomes angry, and you suspect hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing ingredients; then return to treatment until healed, thus hair is replenished by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you apply the natural remedy for each type of wound; and do not occur in such injuries to them. And then as long until healed this kind.
des voines des eulz	From veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red swellings that are covered over with oil, they impair the vision and weaken the eye daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, the first thing you should do is examine where the swelling is located in the eye; if it is outside and nothing else, then treat it as follows: instruct the patient to place their head against your chest, then gently compress those veins along the entire orbit according to your wisdom, and make them subtle and double by this method.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two veins by degrees in one course as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then blow the vessels gently, and draw out the blood hour by hour until you see them removed from the oil; and ensure that you do not bleed the oil at the tips of the spatulas, and perform this operation in the middle of the day before the sun, being very diligent in your work so that only those vessels are bled; and when you have done this, distill red and green dye into the oil collar to corrode what remains in the spleen.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to remove it all in that hour, apply a poultice on the oil of soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it untouched until the pain is eased and you are sure there is no inflammamation heat; then resume according to this method as long as they are healthy:
de la fistule de l’oil	For the oil abscess.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When the vein is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and by using hot medicinal ague as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then in it there is a trick where you cut above the abscess, at the spot where it must die off, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, return with all the instrument as described; it is called "aspre chief," made of iron from a piece of metal shaped like this pointed tool.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the exposed bone area, then turn between your two fingers and press with your hand slightly until you know that corruption is removed; do this again if necessary, then replenish the area with drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the sclera is swollen and pale, and the body of the bowel remains so for forty days, with no recurrence or abscesses occurring, and nothing else happens that indicates health; if not, there is no other remedy but to bring back the fistula through the nose near the forehead as follows: first expose the bone again using iron, along with medicinal acids, and when it has been exposed, take a foretype according to this method, making the iron eyebrow have three angles, and shorten the shaft so that its length is just visible, as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it near the bone by the cheekbone, and keep your hand away from the oil pot, then turn back to make a complete hole until it pierces the bone and feels pained as he goes in if his hand is on his nose; and then restore the original position with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the pus forms and hardens the lobes, so does the matter move to the nose; this is an easier thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nostril
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When all the limbs are opened entirely, and there is no sign of disturbance in the nerve or thinning, then you must bind the patient; then wash it, then apply compresses that do not burn to draw out blood, then place a dressing made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolous. Afterward, strain the dressing, and lay a plaster on bandages and linen; ensure the bandages are sufficiently soft, doubling each one fourfold, and then layer them according to how much the limb requires. Then stretch it by placing a hard board beneath, and resume bleeding without burning compresses; remove the compresses and leave the strained dressing for day and night, and if the binding becomes too loose, you must release it completely. After a day and night, remove the binding, and if you see the wound closing up, that's good; if not, resume using plasters, linen, bandaging materials, and compresses until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The fall of a sheet or cloth used (in context likely referring to surgical dressing)
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the vein opened and visible, as a grain of resin, and it is hopeful to see; then you examine its workings, inserting a needle at the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle or use doubled thread from that part by the ear; pierce it, leave the first needle according to its placement; then cover the place with the double thread and tie a portion of the vein around it, straining it well, then extract the needle and put on the bandage moistened in abundance; leaving until the threads fall out with the vein, then tend the wound with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by any part of a circle of cloth, until it has been healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give a great appearance, pierce it at the subtle edge that emerges from the eye, and pass a white film moisture and lower the edges, and enter quickly; then extract until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowels of the wound
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunati" is not more than a vein that has assembled in the oil, appearing as water flowing downward, but it is not; and the appearance of this treatment is such that you make the patient sit on a properly arranged chair, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and observe until you see the vein rising above your fingers; then insert it fully, and do not withdraw or dislodge any lumens, and let the patient view things as usual; if they don't recede, know that this is water, and if the configuration of the vein isn't arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient is seated between your hands, then take the fine spatula and gently apply it to the horny film just slightly above the growth; and as long as the bend has formed, let it be poulticed with a continuous application on the horny film and crown, until healed. And when it is healed, distill in the oil of hot sweet water mixed with honey or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then apply another treatment as long as it remains healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the appearance of waters in their separation, and what is to be done for piercing; if carried out according to healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light and sun, and oil him well, holding firmly; then place the paper with the oil in your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if his eyes are on the right; then take it in your right hand if his eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if his eyesamoignie which is called "almagda", or to your left hand if his eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument next to the crown by the thickness of a hair at that corner of the oil near the lesser outer rim, and insert the "almagda" gently, and rotate your hand until it pierces into the corner of the oil, feeling as almagda enters into the emptied space; and it is necessary that the pathway for almagda be at the full measure of the space from the plumule to the end of the black part; and this is the crown of the oil; you will see the bone in that paper through its transparency, then place the instrument up to where the moisture is, then express it after another route.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If they go numb now, look at the patient's face and the instrument against his palm.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting for a moment, and when the numbness returns to the second way, apply pressure with the instrument, and once it is firmly inserted and no longer feels numb, gently twist your hand slightly; then remove a small piece of bone, and look inside that hole.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then insert the stopper or softened linen in oil and wax abundantly, and seal with clean flesh.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 And those of our time, apply a poultice with plenty of wax.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the splinter cannot enter through the bone due to its hardness, as some people have overly hard nails, it is necessary that you use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this shape exists:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And so pierce the conjunctiva gently without going too deep but making it adequately perforated, then apply a paste as we have said; and after complecuplting the work, provide comfortable bedding for the patient to sleep on his back in dim lighting; ensure he has gentle movements and easy foods, and does not move his head or arms either left or right, and maintain him according to his disposition until the third day; then leave him in a similarly dark house, examine his vision, and show him various things, and afterwards reattach the ligament by the seventh day; it is not advisable to do this at the time of treatment or immediately after incision, but rather when the numbness arises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If abscesses arise, remove the oil in front of the seventh day and apply whatever soothes the abscess; when it is calmed, uncover the eyes and rest its face for a day to cover any discharge, and remain in that darkened room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then it should go out little by little from the house and become as before; and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one day among us from the Yrach came and told us that in those days people were suffering from an almagda perciet, which caused watering of the eyes, but I have never seen any in our land nor heard of it in books by ancient scholars; and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them seem to see: and they are truly like this.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	The head of those from this same subtlety lies flat on three corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 At no time do various tumors arise, of which there are some that appear like many stings; and if there is such or it has a thick crust of furious color, and appears soft of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In the case of such tumors that are soft and not crusted, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands in the sunlight; work on its nostrils, and pour anointing oil over those tumors, and remove their furrows; then secure what you can hold with a spatula to the slender tip of one side until you know that such tumor is entirely bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	on t carne; but 1ire by Chs des t
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If no work is done, and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is sane; and if moisture does not penetrate correctly as it should, suspect there is char or a hole in the bone above, which prevents pressure from being applied to pull: therefore, you must tie a piece of flax thread slightly thickened by hand, leaving space between each knot; place the patient's head under this filament with some slack, and guide it gently until it emerges through the mouth. Often children in schools are treated in this way, making it an easy task for those who perform it; then hold one side of the jaw where movement occurs by hand, and the other side where there is a gaping hole in the mouth with your other hand, feeling each knot as you guide it through.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do what you know will restore the damaged hair, then treat the child with a thread, extract the blood, and anoint the filament with Egyptian salve; return it properly to its place as before; do this for III days or more, until the ointments dissolve all that is lodged in the strand; then put on the head a linen bandage without any delay until healed, and if there's need of dried medicines, use them; this is the method to cleanse the instrument used for purging the scalp, by which one distills oils and medicines into it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, as if it were a vessel; and lead the same way. If you see anything, make a closed vessel for purifying the head; and have one hand to hold the head while heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease arises at the head of the neck known as "telul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to sight; therefore, it must be cut off from the beginning, and the bone fully removed, then placed on fire or with burning medicine; and if not promptly done while it's still small, watch carefully for hardness, strange color, poor sensation: do not treat with iron as it is an incurable abscess, because each time it is cut, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from a sensitive area, not of strange color, and you see that it can be completely covered, relieve the patient's fear and cut without causing pain, curing dryness and constriction.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut off and removed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Believes that when continuous supply comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it benefits little, even in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If this occurs with anyone, first check if the wound is fresh and bleeding; then sew up both edges of the cut and treat until it heals; and if the edges have become detached on either side, you must scrape all parts of their skin so they heal, then bring together both edges to sew up again, apply powder after applying bloodpowder from a dragon's blood, incense mixed in; and place over the powders a piece of lead or other lead melting, and leave it until it draws out impurities through itself, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suturing is that you assemble the thread: either with needles as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have shown to you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For dense abscesses on the lips that appear like grains of peas, both small and large; then you must turn the lips and divide each one, taking them with tweezeboar-shaped instruments for each part; afterwards apply vitrioline vinegar to the incision site until it is healed; and then apply a soothing ointment, treating the dried areas until they are healthy.
de la char des gencives	From the edge of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often arises on the gums near an abscess, which the ancients called 'albulus'; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing blood or pus to flow; then apply vitriol broth or other restraining and drying powders; and if that edge returns after incision, and often occurs, so the abscess is opened a second time, and cauterized: it does not return after causticization; these are methods for closure.
des sordens	For ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At times they are gathered in the heads of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough patches that are ugly and sharp; and at no time are the teeth black and citrine and wobbly, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell foul; it is necessary for you to make the patient sit with his head in your hands, and its eyes be on your holy symbol, and remove either the teeth or rough patches that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do this with darkness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolorations, as long as they are healed; and if something is removed that was causing the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and third, until you have everything removed; know that teeth require various forms of treatments to be cured, according to what the work shows, because those who wrongly extract the teeth have different shapes than those which are extracted between the gums; these shapes and others should be provided with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the teeth and their pain, you must not delay in grinding them as much as possible, because this is a high-quality substance up to the point where there is no excuse for extracting it; therefore, do not hesitate to use force when necessary.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is straining to urinate, it is necessary that you are certain about the condition of their teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the patient suffers from pain, and believes it to be a sore or dental issue, and tries remedies for the bad teeth; yet the pain does not depart in this way until the underlying evil is removed, as we have already done with such causes; and when you are certain about the tooth causing pain, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth all the space possible to protect the gum from every direction; then move it with your fingers or pliers slightly at first and gradually until they are well aligned, then firmly hold them; and keep the head of the bad tooth in its proper place among the bones between your jawbones.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these ointments and apply it inside from every side gently, then move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 If the tooth is pierced and removed, it must be filled with cloth where the gums are; and if strained delicately with pincers, so that it does not break when extracted; and one must work very carefully around the gum line to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And make sure not to break it, and leave a part behind; causing greater pain from the root for the patient initially.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And be aware not to act as ignorant barbers do hastily and recklessly breaking the veins every time without considering our teachings; but bring about great disease through this poisoning affecting the roots that remain or the veins they break, as we have often witnessed; and when a tooth is pulled out, wash its socket with wine or oil and silex; and if bleeding occurs there, which often happens, fill the socket with vitriol paste; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the remedies that make you move the teeth first have long points and large handles, which do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they have large limbs that do not bend easily when grasped, and are made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them securely.
de la racine des dens	From the roots of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains attached to its vein, it is necessary that you place a linen cloth soaked in butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 Until the tooth is smoothed, you use pliers called "Alferri," which make the head of the bone appear like a surgeon's chisel; and internally they are fashioned like a file, this is its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	the le Mort; 1.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	When it is large and thick so that it does not break easily, and the root jumps out through this opening, this is good; if not, use all methods available for forming them, which then come afterward.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use the instrument that has two prongs, thus is the form as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments placed in front on the density, and of this instrument which appears like large pincers, thus is the form as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And thus this is the strain that cannot be broken, and know there are many strains of the same kind; and other strains which are not counted among them; and the wise master craftsmen discover by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and illnesses show him, for there are some diseases or the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the variety of parts, so it does not break at all in the cartilage or other bones, but seeks the strains which must be done, as I have told you, and assists with gestures, such is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Let them be large and well-fitted to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore it back with appropriate medicines for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, you have all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to natural shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the root remains after the teeth, and it is not located correctly, and cannot be filed or trimmed; then scrape them. And if there are spurs with the teeth, take this instrument as shown in the image, which is similar to a small beak, and it is made of iron inserted into sugar:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the wax is taken little by little over many days due to dental hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can be filed down, then file in a manner consistent with its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like filing a needle; and file the tooth little by little over many days gently, so that it does not move until it smooths out; then in the end there are no rough edges at all, and if the grinding has been too aggressive and it blunts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness until it is even, such that it neither blunts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	When a tooth becomes loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are to be loosened, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press upon what they chew because it does not move when bitten, you have treated them with constricting medicines but there is no effect; if needed, restrain them with a thread of gold, for silver threads turn green and rust, but gold never changes. The thread should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; if they need to be aligned straight, take a double thread and place it between two healthy teeth first, then fit the misaligned teeth in between them as many as there are until you securely reach the other healthleteh dent; then resume covering up to where you started. Gently and skillfully remove your hand, making sure they do not move. Secure the ligature to the tooth root so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then grasp the head with a pair of pliers, and join them, placing between healthy teeth, ensuring it does not touch the tongue; then leave it as tightly closed as possible until it can remain in place, if it loosens or moves, use another wire to straighten out the twisted ones. If they stay in place, it will serve for its entire lifetime, and this is how healthy teeth and the shape of newly formed two healthy teeth, and two fillings appear:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	When a tooth falls out and is repeatedly reinserted into its original position as we have mentioned; only individuals who are skilled and patient should be involved in the process, never attempting to form it with the bone of a stag (i.e., using another material). The tooth is placed back where there was a deficiency, secured as previously described, and remains stable for a long time. This implies that proper dental care techniques are necessary for successful outcomes, and only qualified professionals should attempt such procedures due to their complexity and the need for precision and knowledge of materials suitable for permanent replacement or repair of teeth.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	tions. I2 Confit.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Never is this type of linkage that comes from under the tongue or naturally present as such; sometimes it occurs accidentally due to a quickly sealed wound, and its placement requires working with the mouth of an injured patient while keeping his head in place, lifting the tongue; then sever the nervous connection through the large opening so that the tongue is released from its position, and if there are hardness or bumps, it's a result of a quickly sealed wound, where you insert a pin and cut the wide part; ensure that the incision is not too deep for the artery below; once done, raise the lid of rose water and ointment, or cold water, then place a linen bandage under the tongue so that the eye cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if blood flow changes, place vitriolic salt on the wound; and if it does not stop bleeding, then cauterize with a lentiginous caustic, which is good for this; then treat with another remedy until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is of color or blackness or hardened, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch it as it is cancer; and if it recedes to a blister, and there is moisture, pour on the cautery, and fumigate with a delicate substance, and remove from both sides; and if your first treatment prevails at the work, then place vitriol paste until healed, then return to the original procedure as you finish all; then elevate the head with ease and calmness, and treat with other remedies until healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	ix, liant it is sore, et cest la ore if fain the l'ariz ot dite, but themes: and then let a bone le telle ise the te pierre d’avise et sereaux to pain dites du temps. And sores, the ou noir; si est de eis seize the cures, et of liant, soignez it the lits with lontaint: or les pren till them es ail not ome le t’em.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Never comes a throat swelling known as "godath," and they are properly called the two almonds; when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they do not heal, be careful: if it is an abscess of small size and soft color, do not touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for the bleeding; let them grow until they are healed, and then you will divide them, or they may break on their own; and if they have a pale color and the roots are thin, prepare the instrument to cut, but first check that the abscess is calmly resting and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit facing the sun with their head in your hand and work the mouth, inserting the tool between his hands, pressing the tongue from below along the entire instrument; it should be made of silver or fine iron as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You must press the tongue against all parts of this instrument and observe the abscess, then take the needle and insert it into one almond until you can't push any further; then tie up anything from slipping away with it, followed by covering the instrument part where its form appears to be a forceful tool; however, the head is bent, alternating in position, very sharp, and made of either iron or fine bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	Here's a la est est instrument, et les maintement, you can be all with it the chauquarge d'oftes. ici est to the pliant, and of, but so that the c the instrument, ou sewit is made ongne, just as coi de l’est, here, in a ce que tu pee, et thet ecointend with lances: for you may be any le pain est c.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one side, and have no name on the other; and when you have cut out one of the almonds, proceed to cut out the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the sickly with hot water, and water and ease, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle them with hot water or pitted pomegranate peels that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, etc., until the wound is closed; then cure it until it is healthy. And no other abscesses than the two almonds appear in the throat, so cut accordingly as the two almondangs grow together.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, namely the small-sense abscess; having well closed off the entire throat, she could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if it persisted for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that there were two heads through its two openings on each side of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I have accordingly performed the operation at once and inserted an onocinium in one nostril, then pushed the probe further resulting in a large portion of pus; next placed it elsewhere into the other nostril where I opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards inserted the onocinium into these abscesses, partially drained one, leaving only a small amount of blood behind; thus was cleared the conduit of the throat for the woman, and now she began to drink water and then wine, continuously extracting from that abscess over long periods; as the abscesses would reappear again, filling up what I had emptied so much that it became very large; therefore I deceived and cauterized within her throat: thus it remained without growth; departed from those parts, and only God could bring about after me.
de l’uve	after a part of I the space healed with them as if, but did that is often. Et eyebrtee abscessing large I need to do him or not had it so became c which they should be treated by done and throat it was applied over again it back; s untainted, for them after let them long the pass I put then anoints. They were that with stab worm.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When they are reset to the eye, and it has fled and become long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is from large and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 If it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess head is calmed down, and it is subtle, then it must be excised; and if she is round assembled and not long, and it is blood-colored or flesh color or black, then an incision in it should be made.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, concerning its thickness and length, seat the patient before the sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument we remembered earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull outwards, and cut at I of II strands as mentioned in the incision of II almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess beyond the natural limit; for if you cover too much, it will hurt the voice and speech; and after incision, apply as we have said in the incision of two almonds, and heal until fully healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of being covered, it is necessary that you apply measures for the reassurance before covering them.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The method of the cautery should be acute gout.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient should put their head in your hands and then press the tongue with the instrument that we have said for the caustic paste of the cautery, and rub with fresh hot ashes, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the pressure of this instrument, which is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's head has a hair or gum on the medicine, like the rim of a spoon, and places the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; then have the patient lie down with their back against your lap, so that saliva and mucus come from his mouth into the medicine without going to the throat and choking. Then hold your hand over all the medicine on the eye, applying a quantity about half an hour'cups', until you see it become clear and the biting sensations of the medicine subside; if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument through the middle, keeping it on the eye until the cotton turns brown; do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and remove after .iiij. jors or .v. If you need to reapply the gum of the medicine, repeat the process, and after cauterizing apply a swab wrapped in butter, cleanse what is around the area with the medicine; rinse with cold water and gargle until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective by incision than with the caustic; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and yellow yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and arronge and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in a pot, and place over low heat, and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot insert an instrument made as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it be of silver or wax, and let one of the heads be inserted in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is sclerosed; often times restarting, until the vein dries, and ensure not to apply heat at the onset of a hot abscess, for various things may happen; and do not apply heat only at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, then take a tube and insert the head inside it with feathers of eagle, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; because an eagle feather tube does not let vapor trouble the mouth, and it is a good cure together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And many times sear the throat or spine of fish bone or anything else; if it is thus that you see what you can do so then press your tongue to all instrument under the sun, and move the thing does not and reinserted in the gorge, do vomit patient ais soie also li tissuant is cooked in stomach; perhaps will pass the thing through the venter out; or malaides swallow with sponge or navel piece of lettuce dried bread and dry bread soak up, and then take .i. And then wound the eschies filtront et iesprenuzier liet ; et esponge inlet l’estement; and it come ou a liaire laissiez let. And ete le chauton les estirent que tu et de m etre auaig, si prends est.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	When the swelling is bent backward so it can more easily enter into the throat, raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it may not move or push in any bone; adjust so that the patient inserts the instrument, because where it is easier, they will guide it there; whether blowing downward, or guiding it along evenly with all of the instrument until it feels firm.
de la sansue de la gorge	For dislocation of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Medicine never fails if as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the patient's throat with sunlight, after pressing their tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see it, so treat all small canals or delicate pincers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that is not suitable, then take a boiled cat gall, put it in the patient's throat, and make frequent attempts to expel the hot gall with iron.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And give the patient water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take full measures of cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it in such a way that they can swallow easily, and move their mouth often with your hand; and as soon as they feel relief from the discharge, let them pass it.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 If it does not come out as we have said, then subtly warm the patient with sage infusion, using the instrument mentioned in the smoking of the vein; do this many times, for it will gradually take effect.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The manner of the smoking procedure is that you take a pot where there are hot coals or embers, and place it under a cover with an opening in the middle, then insert the shoulder joint into the instrument; next, you pour your fumigation, and have the patient put the head of the cannula in their mouth, seal their mouth so that no smoke escapes but enters through the nostrils; this will now enter the sinuses, and if it does not come out, repeat the smoking process many times; and allow the patient to suffer thirst and eat salty things but do not drink any water; afterward, they will need to be relieved by this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat sinuses is similar to tongs bent for insertion into the throat; and it resembles the beak of a surgeon's tool, with roughness like sandpaper so that whatever is inserted does not slip out. Here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The instrument used for treating sinuses; and it looks like has texture similar to surgical procedure as the beak of a surgeon's tool, thus:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are many types of abscesses, as remembered from one and another in this book, and they differ by perforation and cutting; there are two ways to deal with it - one being the same, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for boils that occur within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because an abscess at the top is different from one at the base, and an abscess in the thighs is different from those that occur in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesse that should not be pierced until the swelling is complete; and those that must be pierced when they mature, and do not heal according to their completion, like an abscess near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses occur near joints and are left to become ripe, by chance they may corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When an abscess is near the main limb, if you delay perforation until it dies out, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is near the foundation, pierce so gently that it dies without disturbing the surrounding area, and let it grow within, resulting in a fistula. Do not expect to heal thoroughly from such an abscess near the foundation, as it may spread extensively and remain unhealed for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and it diz semblanz; si la perforation, et se tandans. Et li ait on leis qui est dui cilue sont auent; et demeuns que te mourts as evez quant il en escheutres pierre ou les aposteme ne plues tu lor.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bulge, along with that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when abscesses are in their natural place, one must let the puncture remain until it is fully digested as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it from above, the poison of his blood will spread throughout his body and he becomes filled with much filth; and perhaps his lips harden and the deepest parts become solidified.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And for any abscesses that are pierced according to the size of his body, as needed by its members.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary to puncture small abscesseus with small holes and large abscesses with large holes, along with many incisions according to the size of the abscess; if there are such abscesses that need their heads removed or covered, once they become as soft as cloth and dead, do so similarly to boiling bottles: and for those split into three angles, and those treated like a pile's bellows, just like arm-abscesses; and others with circular cuts, other incisions, similar to their appearance.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess rising to the surface, you must simply puncture it easily; and when the abscess is large and has great swelling, do not drain all of the pus at once, but drain only part of it; then bandage the abscess until the next day, then stop draining completely; repeat this process gradually larger each time, until all the pus is gone. Particularly if the patient is weak in strength, or women carrying children, or small infants, or elderly men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the abscess may occasionally burst with the release of pus, potentially causing death to the patient, and do not grieve over it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cleanse this treatise carefully and when you perceive the abscess, open the wound, and examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a neat size, dress with linen or old cotton cloth; and if it'cups large abscesses, and there are many excretions, then it is necessary that you plug each one so they press against each other; and if in the abscess you have cut into an area of skin, and wrapped around it, it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or flax thread without moisture, and tie until the third day; then open, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 If blood flow occurs at your work site, prepare cold and soothing water, and moistened cloths, and place them on the affected area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the blood flow persists, provide proper care and remedies, along with the powders mentioned in this book, especially if it is winter or the area of discharge or abscess is very sensitive, cover with damp tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it's summer and the affected part is fatty, wrap with moistened cloths soaked in water and oil (or wine and cold oil), until day three as we have mentioned, then drain the abscess and dressing, healing as necessary until it becomes healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of pus-filled boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When small abscesses come on the head, and they have treatments that are like pouches, similar to the udders of a sheep, there are many such cases.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have grease and such as hairs with moisture, and there are others that are hard and painful to cut, and there is no doubt if the scissors cause discomfort.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the tasks of cutting are such that you should try with every instrument called "intrusive," from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, they will go beyond its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any hair that contains it, for it returns as soon as you leave anything; then soak a cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving until the next day; this will cure those that are bothered by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And so begin the compression again as before, on the second day and then the third, ensuring that it does not remain too long into the night; then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is filled with pus, follow this method using honey dressing; and pour in antimony ointment, and scrape off all scales, and apply your poultice of lupin seeds around where it lies; and if the arrowhead turns out opposite, do as I have instructed you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat the abscess if it is pus-filled, and with thorns and cleansing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And on the swelling over a pus-filled abscess and the wet area, it is easier because they have less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or heads there is no moisture, and among these are those that I healed from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard a stone, rough and bloody, and could not break it; and if someone had struck it, they would have made a wound like that of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads, those that come from the head of children and the roots of ears, the opening must be done on all days at the most dependent point to allow pus to escape; and treat as it should be.
des scrophules	Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times there are abscesses in the neck and behind the ears, and even in the armpits, and they never appear elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is properly dense in its location, as the notches and abscesses on the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others which are malignant and refuse to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that case where you see a good disposition upon touching, and it is similar to the color of the body, and moves in all directions but not constricted by the nerves or arteries nor veins, and isn't deep; then it should be removed from above, and skinned off parts as needed, extending two flaps near the incision sites, if necessary, as we have said with abscesses on the head; and slowly remove tissue bit by bit, being careful not to cut any nerves or veins, ensuring no spongy flesh nor scraping too much before you remove what should be removed.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 If you cut the vein or artery and cannot work on it, then apply vitriol paste to the wound or powders that remain in the blood, secure the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed and softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood remains stagnant, return to your work until you complete it; then take note of whether there are any small scrofula at the site, and treat and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a significant vein at the base of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula in its root but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang freely without harm; then plunge a woolen cotton bandage into Egyptian ointment and treat.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you drain the entire cyst, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and close them up, so that there is no excess due to its size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is necessary, you must drain the root of it and remove pus, and close as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those cysts that have excessive fluid should be punctured where it opens the most severely; and pierce them as previously mentioned, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things so as not to spoil what has been removed from putrefaction; and once the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply anointing charcoal until it heals.
de squinance	And if you to oil any residue of excessive as weeping; and ointment so what remains like that they remove with.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote of the treatment for a sore throat; however, I have never seen it practiced in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have swelling, it is necessary to clear the flap of the throat called "epiglote"; and nothing can be done about this because all veins and the main organ causing fever are located in individuals with abscesses burning either in the mouth, or the throat, or two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the organ, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should make the cut above three circles or four with a small slit across, between two circles or through the quantity of the incision into the sac, not in the cartilage; and those lumps are suitable for cutting out the section of the epiglottis without any flaw, and the vessels remain long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched out the skin of the throat to its fullest extent, then cut along until reaching the cartilage; and draw out the vessels of blood, if you see nothing else, and then excise the sac as we have said; and shown by the incision into the fume of the cartilage which burst through the opening that is torn, and by the loss of voice; and leave the open wound covered a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed to doubt strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound on its edge, and the entire skin overlies the membrane; then apply medicines that cause heat to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	by:
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then take the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe and he breathes through the wound, thus preventing death; and therefore it is ordered that the physician let the open wound remain so long as the malady of the illness has not passed, which passes in three days or four. And then they order to sew the wound and cleanse, until it is healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw a maiden who took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the trachea; and I went to call for help to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it; and I saw that she had not bled from her veins or any other passage except through her throat, and the bleeding was strong from the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried, sewed the wound, and cared for it until it was healed; but nothing happened to the maiden except that she regained her voice, and returned to her usual state; so I say in treating of the epiglottis, there is no cause for fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These boils are called "throat hernia," and they are large boils the color of jet, predominantly in women; and there are two ways: natural and accidental; the latter does not have a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 The accidental case has two ways: one resembling fat meat and the other like boils that come from us through arteries; there is fear, and it does not require working on large veins but in those small ones, examining and searching for everything involved: if you find them similar to fatty flesh, and they are not attached to any vein, treat as with sheathing the meat, treating all through their cap, if there is anything; examine thoroughly and cure it as needed until perfectly healthy.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many ways for us to do so, which I will tell you all the appearances; and it is now necessary that I explain all the differences that exist between ours and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is swelling and fever-inducing until the boiling over is past and it has been completed, then rests both fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With ours there is neither heat nor fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and according to the color of the body, and begins just like a stone, and becomes larger; and they are according to two appearances, grains, or moisture, and the colors are as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When attending to the patient's wound, first examine and question with all the instrument called "intermitted," according to its form or procedure which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the method of probing abscesses in ours is to squeeze or find more moisture than you see in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the pressure has been felt by the root, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intruders, and be careful so it does not bleed.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs in a vein and it has color like I have said of other abscesses; and if after the intermission there comes no moisture, understand that it is fatty, then do as with the cross-shaped marking, and take it at the punctures, and lightly scrape from each side while covering the coat where it lies to treat it healthily with vinegar; and if you cannot cleanse it healthily, piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains after repeated treatments; and if a bit lingers and causes no pain, apply the wound with corrosive ague powders, tighten the wound, and place soothing substances for other healing methods until it becomes healthy again; and if they are large, cut out the edges of the ward using II ligatures to cure what is causing harm.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	tol so as ete le quittes a is not l’an vient la mot: 1 les kee de parle d’est of patious ouri, li gist et sont they;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Here are the forms of strangled appendages, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them are three types called "albaret", one type called "breb", and among these also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to search for abscesses from fistulas; they are like the needles used in charms, and made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, those moved by valued as yellow ones, and more tested with black paint to search for pus-filled boils of fistulas; and also come three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors are of various shapes as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are tumors with two types of boils in three ways similarly; and if there are tumors with three types of boils, and they come in three ways; and if thereare tumors with two types of boils only, and they come in three ways; all these are necessary at their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these tools that are used for cutting are sharp, and among them there are some that do not cut except in one direction, from which we scrape the nerves so that we don't sever the veins or nerves; and among those intermediaries, the stiles are reset with clamps, such that the patient does not feel it at the onset of abscesses. And they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and these should only be used for flesh like legs, arms, neck, elbangs, and similar areas; and never is made another instrument small, resembling fistula scrapes according to this form, by which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And at no time is one placed in such a way that it touches the veins for copulation, and arteries, and again according to this great method:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 At no time do the nipples of some men become infected when they begin to be corrupted; until they appear like women's breasts; and remain ugly and swoleback, and whoever wishes to treat them should follow this form according to line b. jusques a g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with medicated charcoal paste, then stitch the II edges of the wound together, and treat it until it is healed; and if the nipple tilts downwards, and softens due to its size as in women, form two slits above, by means of two similar cuts; so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, ensuring the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b. up to line g.; then scrape the skin between the II edges and remove the fat, and apply as we have instructed for stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for treatment until it is healed; and if it is not yet healed or the incision isn't fully done because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton pads soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until it consumes what remains and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses on the elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And often it is found in places or any swelling of, and are from them that the oment wherein lest.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowel that is in an abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles like scrofula, treat it as we have described for the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound fills with bowels, prepare a fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the procedure of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is ruptured and the skin is hardened above it, there are often abscesses formed; similarly occurs vein fleeing and abscessing; when you touch it for the artery, then the abscesses will emerge fully; and when you feel with your fingers, you sense intense stretching; and if it's near the vein, signs of deficiency appear; it is folly to cut this abscess, especially when it's under bones, ankles, neck, or many other locations, and they are large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary to remove the iron bandage, and those with a chief injury must also have it removed, as in the case where an artery is protruded above the long skin; then work on the tailbone at the coccyx; then carefully sever the artery from its sheaths until exposed; then insert a needle beneath it, and pierce the artery all the way to the opposite side, holding the artery with a double-stranded thread as I have shown you in the removal of two arteries that are in temples; then leave the spot between the two strands untouched until bleeding stops, and remove the swelling from the abscess; then prepare the bandage so it can be bent while still wet, until it shrinks; then apply ointment as needed, until healed; and if the abscess is through the vein tract, ensure that you tie off the abscess with your hand like I have shown you on the whole skin.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come from the artery and vein; they form in the nerves when struck or due to excessive strain, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This often occurs with shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is the most troublesome boils, and its color seems like the body's skin color, and in various ways cause pain; and when it is forcibly strained, they feel great pain, not from within the entire body but from below the head; it moves well from all sides, neither forward nor backward, upward nor downward, and those with joints should not be bound by iron: sometimes there would be contraction; and those who have atop or forehead hair, cause pus in the spatulary.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the boils are small, if you have pliers, and bind it at its root; and if they're large, suspend them on a hook, scrape off, then stitch up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Heavy hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 On no occasion does it come in stomachs and not elsewhere too, and it is a disease called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to them, and the roots are fine but large; there are small ones and very big ones; I have seen men who had two or more bellies that appeared more like fungi than anything else, with no difference between them, white in color, with a thin root, split open, where moisture is present.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut them and found that one weighed 18 ounces, and the other 6, and the procedure in making an incision is such that you should examine if the patient's skin is moist; the color of the tissue is pale and damp with a fine root; then broaden the wound, and have cauterization by fire present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Many times during tailoring there are great blood losses, and if it does not cease, then apply a hot iron; and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of the incision with steel, take well-made thread and tie off the artery as we have said, leaving for two days; then tighten further, continuously pulling the plump thread until it holds the vessel closed, causing him distress through this effort; if roots are thick, be cautious when approaching the abdomen with the iron, but properly cover most of it before cauterizing to prevent its return; then treat the wound and ensure you do not tug on the vein that is swollen in color, poorly sensed, and reddish appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an advanced syphilis, and I will treat the chancroid hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth jaw is injured
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of gangrene comes from a wound or tear in the shin and is present on the belly and elsewhere, as it occurs in other places, or blood from veins or arteries depending on what lies before, or inflammation; and if it's from the fistula and discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess appears similar to the color of the body, and is a mild condition without pain, open with various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed at its limits, it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be swollen, and greatly enlarges the entrance to the bath and for vigorous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to moisture, it is mild and open when you press with your hand, do not constrain; and if it's from blood, it appears as large and hard abscesses according to the amount; and if it's inflammaturgy, then tender upon touching, and appearances should be checked for signs of arterial, venous, or inflammatory blood.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary to leave the wound open for healing.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there may be doubt and fear, as I have described in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is concerning the intestine or the anus, it is necessary to instruct the patient to insert his finger into the anal canal, and keep it straightened all around; then command him to lie on your lap between your hands, then go around the area you have marked with a chalk cross for the entire great fascia; then extend half of the abscess over the other side. Then tie it securely with a strong thread or cord made from thick silk tightly; and keep the part connected to the ligament as solid as possible; then operate on the extended portion of the abscess, and apply your medicinal ointment, and cause the intestine to protrude downward towards the belly; if you find it caught by the ligament, release it, and put the intestune back into place. If you find a swelling (tumor), remove its excess; and if an artery or vein is causing problems, go around gently, then return to your workplace and take two needles, and attach two threads with them, and insert the needles where you have pierced in a cross formation as previously described. Then extract the abscess through four openings made by the needles; if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal fully, then discharge any dead tissue on its own; or excise when it becomes slimy and softened, then follow the procedure as we have explained; and extract any blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound accordingly.
dou chancre	On the ulceration
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of similarities to ulcers and how one should work with medicines, and how one should apply a heating cure; and let us speak of ulcers that originate in bones, requiring great caution for treatment, and according to the ancients, when ulcers are present or can be reached as if they were sores under the armpit, groin, buttocks, and must be completely removed at their onset; and when they are large and old, it is not advisam to approach them, for I have never seen one healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations when present and can be removed as we have said are to purge the patient of black bile once; then make them fasting if they show manifest repletion, prepare a clean location for the operation; then apply your ointment or ulcer, and cover all with wax, leaving no part exposed; let blood clot fully, squeeze well at the site in your hand or on any object, and if bleeding occurs opposite to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the vessel is sealed; then perform another treatment as long as it remains healthy.
de ydropisie	And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is formed, and signs of each likeness, and the treatment made with medicines, and that which is treated with iron; it only flares up. And one must not touch with iron in these II likenesses: namely tympanitis and hyposarcoma, for they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsurtion like vomiting and other similar matters; do not touch with iron as there is doubt. And if you see a strong patient with only dropsy and of middle age, work in this manner: lift the patient straight on your hands, and have the assistants press the abdomen while pushing water to its lowest part then take the spatula bone-like following this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And take sharp instruments of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And take sharp instruments of two parts. Whether pointed or otherwise, they should not be so thin that they can reach the intestines when inserted; also do not perforate them causing bleeding; then examine if dropsy is originating towards the intestines: if this occurs, make an incision above the elbow by three fingers directly under the point of the elbow; and if dropsy stems from liver disease, perform the incision on the left side above the elbow; and if it's due to a moisture condition, do so on the right. It is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision site as excess fluids should not flow towards him or weaken that area; then perforate all the fascia using an instrument of this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 It is similar to a silver fishing hook, and made of wire or copper, with its part below the small eye; as it curves on one side there are three eyes, two on one side and one on the other; the head is cut so like a pen nib, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut their pens.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top above is the vein, and when tingling comes to its peak, approach with the instrument; empty it so either half or a third portion, because if you empty more than necessary at that time, by chance you may cause the patient's spirit resolution from the arrow, where he sweats, or nears death; but as per his vitality, and according to what the conditions of his vitality mean for him, and his hairs; then move the instrument and grab the vein, which is now held by the hook that pierces through the fissure mentioned earlier; so I have spoken, penetrate in this manner; then resume with the instrument on the following day if you see the patient still suffering thusly, and draw out a small quantity of blood; do this each day, but be careful not to flood too much until it is just enough.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt about the patient, and leave them much water, then treat with burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and dye with drink; and cure with drying medicines until they are healthy, and perform cautery on the stomach and liver and spleen after draining the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From the impotence of the male member
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 No child is ever born without a foreskin on their penis, or if the foreskin is small, or not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary that he must be circumcised very quickly, following this particular method with great subtlety:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then insert a subtle pincers to grasp the clot, and tie it off so that for three or four days or more, when he needs to make urine, open the closure, allowing him to urinate, then reset; and sometimes there is no need because the urine which comes out does not close again.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If the closure is small, it is a remedy for the clot of blood as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the closure in their proper place are blocked because none arise with the closure at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis upwards; and they cannot impregnate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a terrible illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of operation is that the patient lies with their back upwards, and raises the head of the penis and covers it as if they were holding a pin, so that the hernia may fall inside; and protect against blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a ligature to stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of pus from the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these bubbles come in the vein, and it is an ugly appearance of a wart; and there are both malignant and benign ones; so you must pluck them with a fine needle, and excise and clean thoroughly, then place cotton pads moistened with Egyptian ointment; then treat with refined oil until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is malignant, of foul color and draining pus, it is necessary that you apply a fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 Once you have located it, and if the abscess is partially under skin, with part inside hairs and part outside, it is necessary to extract the abscess that is within first; and when it is healed externally, treat the remaining portion.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat it together, make sure the edge of the skin is not perforated, and darkness and decay come to its area; then pluck out all that is blackened and corrupted, afterwards apply a paste made from almond tree bark and dates on the wound, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 If bleeding continues to occur, then apply the lunar cautery according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery serves two purposes: to stop bleeding and to treat infection; and if the head of the penis is infected or retracted, it's necessary to use a wooden tube for urination and to instill medicine into the penis; and when the hair at the top of the penis becomes inflamed as seen in those who are not circumcised, or from injury or abscess, it must be scraped with an instrument until all ligatures are removed, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides; and if this is a serious matter to discuss, then scrape gently at the tip of the penis using some cotton wool soaked in cold water, ensuring it does not become completely bald.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a discontinuation of wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work by our own will, especially in children, it must be done as well and with the best possible method that is beneficial for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice childhood circumcision, for it is not done in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have sought the majority of masters and scholars who practiced circumcision within one day, and with force, and all newborns; it was common because there were two stages, sometimes performing one above and leaving the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	But it results in doubled pain and the cleaning of the newborn is not assured at all; and often during fingernail care, escapes happen with the knife, which may harm the flesh, and wounds can occur as such that there's no need for further cleansing and I have observed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the immobilization made by force throughout the entire limb, I have found from experimentation that it is beneficial, as the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, make the cuts equally in all parts; but ensure that the filament is well strained around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you cause the child to think, if they understand it, that you are only binding the thread around the rod just enough, and then allow it to exude in all manners as possible; then make it stand upright between your hands straight, and re-emerge the forces between your hands or from under your feet so the child does not see them, nor any of the strains; then place your hand on the rod and blow or snuff out, and draw it upwards until the head of the rod is out; then cleanse well of the dirt that has accumulated therein, then fasten its hinge with a double thread, then tie below one point to another piece; and hold it by the second tied part at the pouchet and index finger, and insert between the two ties, then remove the snout carefully and pull up the head of the rod; then let the blood flow slowly and gradually, for this is the moistening; and put powder on top and beneath the powder mixed with glue from a sponge cooked without water in rose oil blended with good fresh olive oil, and leave it there until the following day, and cure as necessary until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	If the force of healing is this: both sides of the chin are held and sharp, and the chin is as large as a fingernail equally on all sides.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	If the error of healing is when the kernel escapes through the incision; therefore it must be extended to your fingernail, so that the left causes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, then use tweezeburners, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they persist for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be left until the inflammation has subsided somewhat, and lightly scrape it; then move as you wish, but protect the area of the rod, as it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus treat the sudden wounds with powder that we have previously discussed regarding powders, and if it covers too much skin and spreads upward, do not harm it; treat as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is from the blockage of a stone, frozen blood, or bone, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see there is retention due to the stone which is located near or at the neck of the bladard, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on their back with knees bent; legs should be placed flat on the back, stretching out the abdomen from the upper part of the back, and restrict the person's movement as much as possible; then one must strain the neck of the bladder towards urine expression above, so that urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary to provide relief with extraction using a tool called "syringe", which has this shape: made of finely worked silver light as a bird's feather, and the nozzle should be one palm wide and half.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method for expelling the urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton at one end, then insert this into the bladder tube; remove any excess wool until only enough remains to fill the syringe up to its head, then grease the syringe tip with oil, butter, or almond oil and make the patient sit on a stool, then anoint their bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; gently insert the syringe into the penis up to the base at the root of the penis, then twist the penis towards the buttocks; next, insert the syringe tip up to the bladebag, allowing the patient to feel sensations until it is emptied, and this must be done in sequence for proper guidance as the conduit may turn; gradually remove all wool from the thread piece by piece, and urine will follow the wool out, then extract it, and encourage urination. Repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction is present therein, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of the entire instrument called "clyster," which is thus formed:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and if there are three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the head of the joint from which the medicine cord hangs so that it touches well the penis without addition, allowing us to extract moisture, and insert when necessary; and when you see your medicines in the bladder, put the chief cleanser into the moisture, and draw through the drainer which is there; then you will drain the moistebrought by the cleaner, and afterwards push firmly on the drainer that is inside; it will enter, come to the bladder now so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of the suppository for cleansing the bladder: so it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 It is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; from under the neck where the ligaments come loose; then take an intestine of sheep and put in it the moisture that you wish to use for irrigating the bladder, then tie it between the two nipples with a strong double thread, and warm the paste over the fire; then insert the head into the enema tube, then hold your hand on the intestine as soon as all the moisture reaches the bladard; and if you do not have an intestine, take a piece of parchment, make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly through; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then close the circle as one would tighten a cordage, and put inside what you wish of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture reaches the bladard.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the division the methods of stone removal and extraction with medicines; and we have mentioned the difference between a stone formed by grains, and all the signs, and where one must work on a stone's size reduction; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will now tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stones formed in the bladebe occur more often in children, and it is a sign that the water of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety; and they are sandy, and gritty, causing discomfort to their penises, and making them urinate many times, then retracting; and with much frequency there are such movements; and it is easy for children until they reach four years old, but it is very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to expel all feces from within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For sometimes it may obstruct the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the legs and stand them up straight, if the stone descends to the front of the bladeback, and sometimes comes out from the lower part; then make him sit between your hands properly, with his hands below his thighs so that the bladder is completely inclined forward; then grasp and touch inside. If you feel the stone in place, proceed immediately to cut it.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not come out with touching all over, grease your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child or has a middle finger, for adults; insert at its base and grasp the stone, when you feel it on your finger, place it in the neck of the bladard; then press above your finger, and push out through where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and he commands that with his right hand he extends the joints upwards, and with his left hand he removes the skin below the joint in the area where they make an incision; then he inserts a filling spatula, which gives it its shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And he makes between those who are between the joints and foundation, not in middle but near to the left side of the nape; and it is right on top of the stone, and your thumb is also there or at the foundation, and its size broad where more room is needed, and internally narrow, according to the amount of the stone, not too large; occasionally press so that the thumb which is near the foundation does not require great effort; and know that it has a small piece of stone or angles, and edges: it should be easy to remove; and if attached where people commonly sit, resembling a splinter, round, whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 And when it has angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not come out, then you must widen with pliers similar to a file at the top, in order to extract the stone so that it cannot escape; or place your tool delicately underneath the head; and if you cannot manage this way, enlarge the small opening slightly, and if scarred, apply sal ammoniac paste; and if there are multiple stones, first remove the largest from the bladder neck, then upwards, then forward, and address any remaining smaller ones afterward.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, one must soften it, causing a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For there are two things that happen to the patient: they may die or their urine continues through a leak where the urethra cannot seal; however, do your utmost in lancing and removing debris with tweezebootes until you treat it piece by piece; and once you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense, aloe, dragon's blood, linen strips, and apply to it oil mixed with vinegar or rosewater and cold water to soothe a burning abscess; then bind up the patient on their neck tightly without removing the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you reset it, raise the area well with oil and water, then treat with the ointment diafiniticum and basilicon until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And when abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and blood congealments in the bladder, and it is retained by this causing urine not to flow normally: then apply your finger to the wound and extract that blood, for if left inside, it will erode the bladaderivae and urethra; then cleanse the wound of water and dirt and hair, and aid in every manner you know, until healed; and it is necessary that all oils used to treat him are bound by tying both thighs together, and apply medicines at the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and led from the penis, lodged inside, preventing urine flow; treat as I have described herein by performing frequent circumcisions, excusing oneself for this procedure during the treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have also experienced this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron bar in the following shape and make it at three sharp points like stakes:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a thread and wind it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then insert the catheter into the rod gently until it reaches the stone; turn the catheter back and forth in your hand near the stone little by little, until you can pierce through the other side of the stone; urine will come out shortly, then press your hand where any part is lodged inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is immediately broken and burst forth with urine, the patient recovers; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents you, then take a thread below the stone and another above, then make the rod open at the place where the stone is between two ligatures, then extract it forcefully, release the ligatures, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; heal until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	From the stones of women (referring to uterine stones or fibroids)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There are times when stones occur in women (referring to uterine stones or fibroidangs), and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and another reason is that they cannot find a woman who knows well how to undress before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 In some cases, one may not find a woman well-versed in the art of healing hands; and another way is that the stone from the woman's body is more deeply rooted than that of the man, so it requires a deeper incision with great fear involved. And if necessary, summon someone skilled, at little expense, or find an expert midwife or a woman knowledgeable in part of the art, and command her to perform whatever you ask regarding stone extraction; and look carefully that the woman is a virgin. Then it's time for her to apply mustard plaster or other substances; and if she finds the stone, she should hold it down from its base, and advise her to place mustard plaster or something else on the patient'cued hand firmly against the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is dislocated, you must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut through the stone at the base of the thigh near the joint, where it has become misaligned and feels like a stone in that area; do not move its knee over or under the stone, but support with your hand on the first small bone; then place the knife along the leg, if you feel the stone so create the wound until the stone can be removed entirely, and know that there are many types of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, those that have veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you examine similar cases to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 If the stone does not pass, then apply saltpeter paste and let it sit for an hour until the stone is lodged firmly; then return to your work, as long as the kidney stones are hardened, and have dressings that I told you in the removal of stones at home to help you in your task; if the stone does not pass, and it's from a vein that has burst, apply powder on the area and bandage tightly with tents and bendels, do not attempt again, leave the stone as is unless the patient dies suddenly; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb restored, return to your work until the bone is strong.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Gathering moisture is nothing but an assembly of dampness or pus, which emerges from under the skin near the joints and contains fat; it is called "pus," and never properly in the tissue of the fat, for if one thinks it's a different fluid, that isn't the case; and this is the leather of the fat around the bones we have mentioned; and such occurrences are not rare.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this pus is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And never does come from percussion of the joints, and this discharge has many colors: or it is yellowish in hue, or without redness, or black, or clear white, and this occurs often; these are signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is as we have described with pus, then they are abscesses not long but like an egg's shape, and do not open the joints, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If it is moisture in the proper towel, then there are abscesses with part of the uvula, and for this reason one thinks it's another joint; if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white flesh, so that it feels quite well; thus, when you see to know the color of the moisture, try touching all around the involved area, as previously mentioned.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be rested as much as possible and replenished in his body; then place him on his back, under something slightly raised, and lay many folds of cloth over him; then sit to his left, and command the assistant to sit to his right, and extend a rod to one of the two ribs corresponding with the groin bones; then take the spatula lightly, and peel the skin of the thighs along their length up to near the wrist joint, making your cut straight while keeping the skin of the thigh until reaching white fat, and scrape it delicently as skillfully as possible; then pierce the fat area clean with water wide enough for a fist, and extract all the water, and then put on lancets, and extend the fat tissue forward; and do not touch the bone of the thighs, but only the fatty part; scrape off either whole or in pieces gently the flesh from him as carefully as possible, for if you don't scrap it well neatly, the water will return; and if the vein bursts at your work, then reset it to its place when you have completed the operation on the fat tissue; then sew together the two ribs corresponding with the groin bones with a suture, then treat as other wounds until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to bind the veins that are hanging, suspecting the discharge of blood; then cut the bone at all the suspenders, and extract the joint, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if the sinew is joined into two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; then join the other part as you did the first equally, then drain the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil on the wound; then apply another piece of moistened linen with wine and oil, and place over both sides, and above doubled cloths, and tie it under all according to this method.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two pieces of cloth and patch them with ragged linen according to this pattern and sew them together in the groin of the breeches; one of the heads pierces up to the foundation reaching until the back, and the other at the part near the wrists; the other head goes over both elbows, and it is entirely gathered into the belt loop of the braier; this particular method for making a fire cautery does not require iron filings, but rather you should take a fine surgical knife, cut the hides on joints, and boil as we have instructed so that the white fibrous substance containing moisture is revealed. Then with the caustic according to this form, puncture the sheath at the ankle points, and scorch it with a hot cautery blade:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the plaster in all ways you know how, as long as you have reached everything; and keep that the heat does not touch the skin; and understand that this work is more healing; and with care to prevent blood flow issues, and aids for bleeding; and if anything contrary happens or abscesses or blood flow problems or other things occur, treat what causes these contraries, as previously mentioned.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrific nature, as instructed, perform a puncture in the manner I have told you; then ensure that after being certain by the meanings we have mentioned about which way the water flows is correct, make the patient sit on a raised seat with it elevated; then pierce the abscess at the location below all of the flesh wide open, and insert the puncture along the entire length of the body; and keep the holes large so that the fluid drains fully; then place cotton over the area, bind it, and let the remaining water drain; then treat until the wound is healed; and if a swelling bandage does not allow the fluid to escape from the opening of the wound, you must use a straw or instrument used for draining fluids as previously described; and enlarge the wound slightly, understanding that the fluid will return, and comes together after six months or so, and when it is reunited as before, then the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	s; If you give me. Est acpleez:Cole tad that la crot et les ben :l's (prie 1.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In this part of the treatise, there are various dangerous arrangements causing fear in many; and it seems to me that one must simply observe them; and I will tell you about the procedure and appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the thighs; and this is very common.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is known to be due to excessive bitterness and chills spreading into the joints or from blows; and the color of the abscess corresponds with the body's complexion; there is no pain, but it is a severe abscess; sometimes we have frightening and piercing boils of violent colors that never come to our heads or blood swellings.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from us [the physicians], you recognize the condition of the abscess by how hot it feels when pressed between your thumbs; and there should not be any contact with it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 Those who are from an inflammation of veins can be recognized by their disposition to pain upon touching the joints, and may make well-suited incisions on this appearance, and on other wounds; then cut out the head of the bone, let it elevate upwards, and treat the adjacent white flesh, and free the suspensory ligament from all parts of the bone.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the bone is already settled with these wounds, then it is necessary to cut and pare the bone; if there are abscesses in the white flesh or within the vessels, then one must free all that tissue completely and roundly skin them.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of a stone is there, you must completely cover it and extract the calculus as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are finished, dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other salves until it is well again.
de l’aposteme des coions	s; If you give me. Est acpleez:Cole tad that la crot et les ben :l's (prie 1.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a pustule, with the softening of tissues, and it causes the patient to turn frequently when approaching; and the treatment for this disease is as fearsome as the one mentioned before, but we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a saddle pad, then tie his arms to your knees, all the limbs near the thigh, and the master's hands, and fully stretch them out; then bandage with a sharp trenaile across the joints, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side as we have said in removing arteries that are on temples; then insert a needle or thread double, and tie it at the first place where blood comes to be seen, and firmly tie it to the other end. Then bandage evenly straight according to body length, and remove corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with bowing injuries, so that no sinew is cut off from either arm; for by this there will be no harm, and if blood comes up in all veins, it is necessary to bandage arms to all veins; so that bones do not lose their strength due to the incision of veins, and they dry and can heal.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the treatment for scrofula
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The effects of this treatment are by sectioning that results from strangulation or extension over the abdomen in the area of the arms, causing the intestines to descend on either side; and this descent is due to strangulation or the extension itself, occurring through these many ways: by blows, jumps, screams, or lifting heavy weights, and other similar things; and the signs when it's from arm extension, are that they occur slowly over a long time, and not suddenly; and abscesses are equally distributed towards the forehead because strangulation hastens the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of division due to a boil, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse appearances appear from near the skin and it's for the exit of the intestines and the body affected by the boil.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	At no time do they tie the intestines with cords, and are kept thus; it causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must take care to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The manner of the treatment is that you command or patient to insert fingers into the wound on his hand deep enough if possible; then gently twist around his neck with your hands, lift up the thighs and extend them outward; then pull the head towards yourself atop all the skin from the lengthy legs; then put in hooked nails of the waist as needed to open the wound, using those that you can insert; then scrape off the tough abscess under the leg's skin until it is fully removed from every part; then put your index finger where there is flesh between the second and third abscesses, separating what is in front of the white abscess which is underne groin skin, and between the second abscess; then pull to right with fingers inside thigh skins bringing up the white abscess towards left hand, lifting all abscess tissue toward waist; then command assistant to extend abscess flesh upwards, separating what lies behind this junction point; then try using your thumbs if there is intestine wrapped or hard abscess felt, and if you find any, place in stomach below groin skin; then take a needle of about 1-inch thick made with X strands, and insert at the posterior part of abscess after waist. Then proceed to tie up visible threads that appear from these X filaments until there are IV left, tying them together as in a cross, securing abdominal flesh below leg skin; then wrap thread ends tightly so that no blood vessels can enter causing an abscess, none should grow inside it; and finally secure the lien according to the first lien's length by both thumbs, and after these two liens leave a tough part of leg skin as wide as one finger's breadth. Then proceed along the curvature of flesh described earlier; then cut in the area below groin skin not piercing through or bending, as previously mentioned; then apply greasy wool to raw areas and place on wounds, afterwards secure with lien we have talked about.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to concern for blood flow disruption.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This often happens, and leave the ligament until it heals by itself; and if it lags in healing, apply boiling water, and put what we have mentioned, until it heals; then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healthy again.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made as a joint being put together with a screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels after cutting near the bone lightly on both sides; then bind them tightly, and treat the abscess from what works, until the vessels heal; and cure it just as we have said, until it is completely healthy again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 It never happens to have any bowels come out, just as we have said, and open the lungs; and do not let any of the intestines fall into the joints, and if they do, it's little, and everything returns within hours; however, if this persists for too long at this point, it creates a wound or hernia until the intestine protrudes; and this occurs by the extension inward of the hernia that is into the joints, as we have said, because they are extended, then softened and swolpressing the lungs and open; and cure it just as with cauterization, as we have previously said: so that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the inflamed skin of a width according to three fingers' breadth; then extract the hernia that is underneath the tough membrane that covers it, then grasp the root and place it over the visible hernia above the belly, and compress both sides; then extract the root tip, and do not expand or otherwise work on the hernia, as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal bowels; then cure with wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you treat the wounds, if they become infected and heal the injury, until it is healthy again.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is swollen, with no appearance in the wound, and the fire cautery moves easily at this spot, bringing more healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the hardened skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around joints is softened in some men, because the strings within are moisturized and transparent; and it's necessary when one wants to treat them, that the patient lies on their back with the affected side up, and covers the moistened skin over the natural skin. Then join the two edges together with a stitch, so you see the first excess of the softened skin at three or four firmly placed stitches; then sew between the stitches like other wounds until they are healed, and let them bleed slightly.
dou chastrement	By burning method
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Seizures are considered in our law, and for this reason I would not want to discuss them in this book; however, they are necessary for two reasons: one is that healers should respond when asked about it and its treatment, and the other because we often need the taming of various animals such as goats, sheep, horses, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say that seizures are caused in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one where we make them through attraction, place the animal in hot water until its joints are softened and relaxed; then grip the area with your hand until it is restored and you no longer feel any pain.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the procedure of trimming: it is necessary to grasp the beast, and press its skin with your left hand's leather, then tie the suspender, and cut above each joint after they have been well scorched; and leave no piece without a slight tear or the subtle sore that is under the bones; this method of trimming is more effective than those done by attraction because in the latter nothing may remain on the joints for which the beast craves release; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are individuals who possess both male and female reproductive organs or traits. This condition can be referred to as true hermaphroditism when an individual has ovarian and testicular tissues, which may be separate or combined in a gonad known as an ovotestis. False hermaphroditism occurs when there is the presence of only one type of reproductive organ along with secondary characteristics of the other sex.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 A hermaphrodite is in two ways among people: one where between the two joints it resembles the shape of a woman's body, and sometimes excretes urine;
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other method is for women, with swelling as much like a rod and two knots.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for men and women is to remove all stones in their bladders, and treat them as other wounds; in another way, there are no remedies for those whose urine flows through a protruding scrotum.
de la tentigene	Of the lice-bringing
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A testicle is a stone lodged in the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, which requires treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary to grasp the excess of the testicle with your hand or fingers and remove it gently; do not pull too hard so that bleeding does not occur, then treat as another wound until it heals; and for a stone that emerges from the mouth of the matrix, which enters and may burst forth violently, and is likewise called by the old "disease cow.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary to address this issue as we have explained through practice, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Of rocky terrain
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 Erratic when the nature of women is not fully understood, or their periods are small; and it's by birthright, or due to illnesses that have occurred, or it's because of a strenuous labor, or a subtle snakebite, or spider bite, occurring at the hips, thighs, sides, or elsewhere; and they prevent conception, pregnancy, and sometimes childbirth. And knowledge of this comes through observation of their behavior.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling is presenting itself in early stages, whether it's on both sides or one side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a very subtle sore, and it extends to both loins, so that you hasten its healing: place your index fingers together, and the woman be on her back with her legs spread; then extend the two loins fully, until the subtle soreness is cured, and over them are the plasters; then take wool, wool in oil, and apply it to the sore, and let the woman lie each day as one might heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the soreness is hard and spiky, it must be cut with a surgical instrument resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscesses are of charcoal and have formed an onion-like structure, cut them with a surgical instrument and plaster; and have the wound-stopping medicines such as acacia blood, dragon's blood, incense, in abundance mixed with oil; then prepare a large linen bandage so that the wound cannot close; thus be lengthy, and then dress it with a dry linen tent; and thereafter apply other treatments until healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 When a boil comes to pass on the arm, it must be covered as follows, unless there are incurable abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 Because of an increasing abscess on the arm, do not attempt to treat with fire.
des emorroides	Emotions often involve feelings of discomfort or distress related to situations affecting one's internal state and external conditions; in the case of hemorrhoids, it concerns painful swelling around the anus due to vein inflammation.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Morbus are initial stages of veins which are not accustomed to bleeding, and when morbus become old if they harden; and we have already discussed in the division similar cases, signs, and I will now say those that respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that morbus and hardening when fully in the arm, they do not appear to touch, except by curing with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the beginning of the arm, which can be felt, these can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, and spread the poultice with pincers, and wrap it at its roots, then powder with binding medicines such as snake oil, blood of dragon, and incense, among other things; then pour its feet into boiling water for an hour, then place her in icy cold water; if bleeding occurs there from, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, hawthorn berries, and such things, and then take wheat flour, confuse with honey and oil, and make an enflamed plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it becomes inflamed, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, apply airsuction to the back and near the breasts without causing harm; then take lamb's wool, and milk in juice of plantain or juice of aglet with wine old, and apply at the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when an abscess is healed, treat the area with ointment until it becomes healthy; and that which is called "alabathir" is red, and resembles a rough surface like I have described earlier; and then cure it until it becomes healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscesses come in the groin area, such as chancre and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, itching diseases, fistulas, hemorrhoids, burning abscesses, and various other maladies that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, in this treatise, I must tell of the hot abscess that occurs on the muscles, which is not simply a boil; and if you know how to work with iron, observe whether the abscess is warm and at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and red when seen.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let the pain be soothed first; then make the patient sit on a chair, and have small chairs that they can lean back on, with support for their back and gathering of the foot parts on the wrong side of the leg; spread out his hips, place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with good linen; then insert the instrument towards the right rib cage, which is how this comes next; and it must be that when you see it inserted into this instrument, you push the rod in to know the depth of the muscle, so that what enters from the instrument does not come out more than necessary and doesn't hurt the patient; if there are larger protrusebs, cover the depth of the muscle with cloths so they don't injure it; then put the crown of the instrument above, and dye the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 When the abscess is opened and handled with soft hands, if it must be covered at the top, use ointment of sulfur paste; and when the wound is emptied, you should place in the wound moistened tents made with rose oil or sec green oil; apply the firm tent to the front of the bone, and move down over the bone and along the forearm cleaned and moistened with fresh water or well-cooked leeks; then treat after two days since ointment applied until it is healed; occasionally lift the bone and wound using an enema of water and honey, then with water or roots of lily and yarrow that are long cooked; then return to ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed on the skull, it is necessary to avoid using iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural shape of childbirth and the signs when she sees a woman rush to give birth, desiring strong odors: then hurry that the baby will come out; thus you say that this childbirth follows the natural figure, and it comes forth from its head, and is accompanied by another (twins); and when you see these signs, it should be gently pressed on her belly so that the baby comes quickly out; because as soon as it emerges from its head, it is also accompanied by another, and the skull's excesses are well-formed through good cleansing; and those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 At times it comes upon his feet, and approaches the body or head, and hands, or when it arrives at his belly or sides, and is transformed by chance around his neck, and other malicious shapes; so it is necessary for a bailiff to be wise and subtle in these matters, and free from error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how one should assist him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes down naturally on his head and the woman labors strongly, but her strength is weakened, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; prepare its natural oil or fenugreek to be cooked, and then place it between its thighs with a small suppository of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And it splits the secondina, and cleans his nails as long as the moisture that is in its course flows; then rubs the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if not, one must enemas the woman with muscat seeds of fenugreek oil; then apply it to her and induce vomiting for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands are forced outward, one must gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot reenter, place a stool beneath her, lift her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground, support the woman so she does not slip as she rises; and if the hands still cannot be reinserted, resulting in childbirth failure, clamp the hands with tongs previously placed beforehand, extract the infant, and reset it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 From around the child's feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child is placed on its feet, one must first lift it upwards; then slowly turn it little by little until it's levelled; and then grasp both feet and extend them gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it reaches up to the thighs, then command it to press on and there will be an expulsion due to condition; if it jumps high, so may God want.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not extend as we have said, if the turn is little and little, until it reaches its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	they can t. Slavage;
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 If it does not come up as we have, then take musk oil, sesame oil, and melted gum; grind all into a mortar, place the mixture on the woman's body within and apply liberally, then make her sit in warm water until beneath the ribs; when she is softened, rub with myrrh oil, place it under, and leave for an hour. Then have her sit on a chair, induce vomiting and strain her mouth and nose, gently massaging the belly as the child moves now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From under the child's knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, the midwife places her hands little by little; then it should be gently supported on its neck, and the feet are hung downward, and laid beside the bed; and bends its hands little by little, and then presses the hands above the belly, and removes the pillows underneath, until they are properly aligned downward; and if the child does not kick, she grips the feet to form a fist, then forms the belly forward, then blows on its back; and gradually moves the child; and commands the woman to squeewart as long as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the time of the child's birth, keep a hand on it as if widening its grasp
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It requires engineering to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go; if she cannot walk, lie her on the bed with legs bent; then arrange the bandages as I described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then try again to return the hand; gradually move the child according to its natural shape, cause it to sneeatury, and command that she squeewarts until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the dislocation of the child's head from its neck, with hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the barber dye his hand, then turn it slightly and gently rub with musk oil and ointment as we have said, then command it to move slightly; and after having done this, place her on a chair seat, and command her to waggle; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, every other time resetting
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes to this method on the second finger, grip the fingernail until all moisture is gone; and if any flesh appears on his face and neck, clip the hangnail so that it is not held back, causing the flesh to move away; then insert the child within, as long as you have placed him correctly, and command the woman to waggle her head: then gently do this.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the release of splints.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Sores often occur many times, sometimes none in three or four; and it is not an extraordinary thing, and little happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 There are two things that neither live nor exist, unless they have names; I know their multiplications, and they are expelled by the syphilitic who orders them, which is bound to buboes; and sometimes they emerge naturally like all others under the skin, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they emerge suddenly, as we have said in treatment, and the subtle bale is made, and quickly and lightly does what it must do; thus it moves for health's sake.
de plusors enfans	among several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are never formed in mares I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, nor more up to XV, but rather shaped like a child by the careful and glorious measurement of the wise physician; hence the subtle bale understands all this, for perhaps similar things happen; it acts accordingly as needed.
de l’enfant mort	that dont the same leue doit li its time sofaire remedy; and his skillet or craft, he not can is a word, si come the after they are craft est et artiste with your art done
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When treating a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant, as I have mentioned in the section on methods, and she does not go into labor, you must perform manual procedures; therefore, it is necessary to know if the woman is of sound mind, without any incidents or fear of death. It is required that the woman be placed supine with her head elevated, and legs raised; then, the attendant should wipe the perineum with oils moistened with musk, aloeswood, and flaxseed oil; afterward, rub the hands with these oils and substances. Then gently insert it into the vagina where the fetus is lodged if not yet delivered from the lower end of the body; take care that the baby does not emerge on its head as you would expect in a normal delivery; then place the cone (probably referring to an obstetric forceps) either onto her fingers, or into her mouth, or under the palate, or below the beard, or near the foreskin, or close to the groin. And it should be held with your right hand while placing a cloth between your thumb and index finger of the left hand; then gently insert the cone at any of these locations until the desired effect is achieved; this is the form of the cone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then push against the other joint as needed for extraction, ensuring that both are aligned; and then move them equally from either side to allow movement, and have the joints evenly spaced so they can hold firm, just like their shape.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if any part remains, lubricate the patient's joint with oil and insert it there, while treating the other part; and if nothing remains, place this joint or higher as needed and continue until all have been dealt with.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought together, it is necessary that you wrap above the wrist until completely straightened; then secure at the joint of the sole or on the arm, and thus do the same for the other hand, with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If the child's head is large and difficult to extract from its socket, or it has a high forehead that has been assembled, you must place the spatulous bone between your fingers, shape the skull, and extract the fluid; then use an instrument called "almidach," by which form comes with tensions or chapters as mentioned above; thus similarly make the child have a large head naturally. Then remove the bones with pincers, and if the head is forcefully pulled out and splits due to moisture from its place, cut it into pieces until the fluid can come out; and if it cannot be released, pull apart as much as you can. If it swells in the abd <intended_translation_incomplete>
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	Oudiez andre t (don; they same-Miel: Caufft the fact; endre.this c[at; If you not s. The oughts.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If it is difficult in the abdomen or udder, if necessary, strain it with a drape wrapped around the hand; and press on the abdumb or udder until all moisture is gone; and if other limbs are inflamed, and the head remains dislocated, then put your full hand inside the marrow cavity, and pull out to the mouth of the marrow; then insert an ivory needle or horn, and push it further; and if the opening of the marrow is closed due to pus coming in, do not exert yourself, but instead apply moist and fatty substances; and after applying them, remove any dryness and firmness with fresh warm water and softening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is over its belly, and you place it evenly, follow what we have said in the living child; and if one cannot do so, then remove by parts, leaving nothing of the spine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, if it follows what we said about abscesses that come in the bone marrow; and if bleeding occurs, then be put in a tight bandage, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with the child in her womb dead, then buried one, and resurrected the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time an abscess came in his mouth, swelled so much that it burst, and began causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	the scaron; he lis, etc. If they gue tret; teli lesse t (c: icheys Droit line.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place on strong attraction, and from it comes an bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I am greatly troubled, for there is no bone in his belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were bones from a deceased child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I treat the wound and break the bone with hands, until the woman is much improved; and it was so for long time like this, then she became somewhat better in her place; and I have not remembered that procedure again because when masters find something strange, they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	f s's unt:
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of the pressure, to which one fastens the books; and at two turning points are two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 However, the horns should be more subtle in restraint, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tool must be wide, with margins from trees one span wide, and long half a span; and amidst them two joints have the same fittings as this tool, which are firmly secured on either side, half a span in length or slightly more; these two fittings are inserted into the mouth of the mallet for turning when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in construction, is made of ebony or boxwood wood like pliers; it has two hinges that are one span long and wide as you see, inserted together into the mallet's mouth, then the woman sits on a chair with her feet apart and legs exposed. Place both hingangs there, hold the head of the tool between her thighs, then operate your hand on the entire instrument similarly to pliers, depending on the amount you see opening the mallet's mouth until she does as she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	man's: [velye (trag;k ; Mal and the old e se uch.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared it, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to retain her uterus and then induce labor under conditions deemed appropriate, with straps on her hands at the mouth and neck area; and if she escapes through that means, well and good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take the means to do so, and provide a pestle or lid, and place herbs that may open the mouth of the woman in labor such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then place a cloth or lid on one side, and the other end into the mouth of the woman in labor, until vapors arise within her, then induce labor as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If one strains the second rib jointly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command the balm to moisten his left hand with olive oil or musk fat from almonds, then wrap in a bandage, and if desired use linen as a second layer; when found, press gently and straighten slightly so that the bone does not slip out during extraction. However, it must be moved lightly to the right and left, then lifted; this will come loose and return to its place.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the bone is too elongated, we have said to cure by sneezing and fumigating with herbs; if it does not heal from all this that we have mentioned, be careful not to neglect treatment; however, it must be tied near the mouth of the bone to the thigh of a woman, then enema with medicinal ointment according to the four-part pharmacology. It will strengthen and return if properly treated, but if it emits foul odors to the stomach and head, it causes nausea in the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If so, then smoke treatments from there are needed as follows: none of the old ones have tested smoke treatment with sorrel and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman to retain the flowering and secondary hairs is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is as if it were a small dog, and the head is placed subtly in nature, with wide eyes near fire; and there are fumigations over the embers, and the lice until they are consumed, then start anew.
de percier lou fondement	Of dissecting the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Children are born who do not have the proper foundation for perception but rather a subtly threaded faculty: therefore it is appropriate for the parents to pierce this delicate part in its right place and avoid tearing of fine tissue, and protect against latching on; then apply cloth soaked with wine and oil, followed by salve treatment until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you suspect that it pops out again, then place or tie a bandage of cloth around it, and let it remain for several days until the child wishes to move in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And in no case does this condition of wound or abscess closure occur; if it is necessary to treat the closure: apply a bandage as previously mentioned with cloth.
de la fistule dou fondement	for the anus's hemorrhoid
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that arise from the foundation are long-lasting and those that emerge near it or within two areas, whether there is one fistula or several; when this inflammation is old, it works, and moisture brings sharp pain or subtle bumps, and these fistulas are never present; they are known by what comes out of them or egestion or bloating when the patient has egestion, and sometimes a snake is seen.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are abscesses that perforate up to the bladder, and up to most of the penis; and reach the hip joint, and near our groin's crease.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one finds the persistent abscess at the base, and it does not heal: you must push your index finger or thumb into the base, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the abscess when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twisting, then you must insert a thin pliable rod or horse hair until you feel the tube or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, but see no discharge, smell, or air: as we have said, know that it does not pierce.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	eisnt ce quater les que sont s;
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the tube comes near to its place; if there is no twisting and discharge causes severe pain: you must pull it back slightly and do not use any medicine or ointment strongly; in these persistent abscesses, laborious treatment has no cure except by the folly of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In cases that are neither panicked nor longstanding, with hope of healing by iron as I have tested, and the patient lies between your hands on his back; then lift their legs up to their thighs, tilting their hips towards their belly; next, apply a tent of wool or cloth if there is twisting, until you know where it applies.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels numbness at the base, it is appropriate to insert your index finger there if you then feel that the tent is sensed; and when you sense between your thumb the sciatic or the hairy part, understand that it is serious; however, do not disturb unless one cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 At all times it can be properly treated, but rarely happens; and the aid that is applied depends on how subtly the cautery is used according to the width of the fistula as previously mentioned; and pours the hot mixture into the fistula until it reaches near the base; and does this two or three times until you know that all the hardened residues have been removed, which resemble a feather from a bird; then treat with burred linen while still wet, until the area is dry, then apply soothing ointment to join and bind.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, that's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the attempt fails to reach just below the foundation, and between your fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of wax or syrup, and you see the fistula through which you can pour the cover, then from the beginning of the fistula put in again before the tent, and then apply cautery afterward until it reaches to the top of the tent; and will be removed the tent, and healed; then mold those residues that resemble a feather of a bird, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal quickly, cut between you and the work, either fire-cauterized or medicated with a salve.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery combines two things: the heating of lodged chariots and the bleeding to dry out moisture; then the treatment of soiled wool either in butter or ground into flour until it becomes wet enough, and allow the chariot axles to be burnt by placing them on a boiling surface; then treat the abscesses caused by sudden sore blisters, and they are drying medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes to the very bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you may strike either the knee or ankle joints with it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent and find that there is canvas or chariot wheels, which are close to being pierced, then only have faith and hope as a treatment by using one of the three methods we have mentioned: either cauterize it as we have said, cut it off completely, or if you can, treat it as the first; do not cut too deeply so that you damage what holds up the foundation, and let the discharge come out whenever it is ready; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be sane, or remove that covering which has been cauterized near the foundation, either with a tent or another instrument sharpened; then cleanse the misplaced wheel in the wound as much as you can; then examine how to restore the wound and keep the fistula below the area closest to the base: it will be an easier matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And never is there a fistula according to this method: and when you push the tent into the fistula, it takes place near the foundation beneath the skin, so take a pierced tent in accordance with this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert a twisted thread into two, and sew the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that punctured area, and push your finger or foundation into it; then pull on the end of the thread, and join the two heads together, straining one against the other, and leave for one day or two; do not strain again until the threads have healed where they are between both. Then care for the wound until it is stitched up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, try to drain it in every way you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make a large incision if possible, but then the healing begins as we have said, until it is sound.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the spatulous thorny thing that is made for creating a fistula is very sharp and pointed; yet on one side it is not cutting, so as you see here.
des emorroydes	the les su; if:s, howd. If yout f: bonge.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 They are in two ways: those that reside within the foundation like a grain of resin, with some small and large ones, causing blood to flow out or from one or several; they weaken the foundation and at its top; but those that have been expelled do not retain much moisture, and either a bit of yellowish water or a bit of blood comes forth, and they have the color of the body. The treatment for those residing within the foundation is to instruct the patient to wipe with gauze until the foundation dries up, and threads appear; then quickly clip them with tweezebr
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to dress the wound according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread from above and pierce the other side of the needle, and turn both ends around the eyelet of the neede, and let it be wide; straighten the thread firmly, then wind the thread, and extract the needle, and do so with all the others, leaving one to absorb excess blood; then put a cloth or bandage in oil rose or wax on the base, and put it there, and instruct the patient to rest; then let it bleed as long as needed, and when they have clotted, treat with ointment and other remedies until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Also the seat of fibrous tissue or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens sharply within the intestines, and by natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is necessary to scrape the skin at the point of a sprain or fingernail above, which does not allow it to become moist; then treat until it is sufficiently healed as needed; and if it cannot be healed, resume scraping more strongly than before, until it becomes very dry, and is well scalded; then treat until it is fully healed.
dou fremit	By a sudden blow
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A formication is a small faulty appearance around the body, and it often goes unnoticed; and no one ever feels cold from it, but it causes a sensation similar to being almost dead with tremors, and spreads throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a large bird's feather, and place that quill over the tremors until the purple circle covers the entire tremor; then turn your hand and remove all around the tremor with the queil, making it disappear entirely, and eradicate the tremor at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a splint from either wax or iron as shown here, and be subtle below and transparent above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not feel it with your hands, but hold and press them together; and if you see it, cauterize the trembling as shown here or using a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	by pa l’sul:d sir toug. Et so ou n'estra;
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made was an enema of silver or brass, or melted lead or molten metal; and never made were these small and large suppositories according to the one for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Thus in the care of children who are weak and painful, they are small [suppositories].
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of enema small or large is as follows: the belly being tied in this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and there is an excess or the belly being tied up, as you see, and the neck is pierced; and to one of the sides two holes are made, and on the other side too; and put medicines from a pig bladder or parchment paper into the belly, then pierce all around these small holes evenly spaced apart, and after filling each hole with strong thread twisted tight for ten times, it is stitched like a goat's body; and when the medicine is inside, tie off the instrument with a strong string at one end, then enema; and this forms a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, anoint the head of the enema with oil or butter from egg yolk or similar substance, then pour it gently; then let the ministers squeeablerd in both hands together until all is expelled, then extract the enema, and lift the patient's legs off the bed as he excretes the medicine to its full extent; and if he sleeps through the night completely, there is greater relief.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer an enema in the case of intestinal issues, and the patient's health improves, as long as it remains so.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoid is at its foundation or an abscess, then it should be cleansed as delicately as for a child; and that's the form of the subtle enema through which the urine is restrained.
des plaies	M, even you give them:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In our discussion on wound care, we will now say about hand treatments and medicines according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the locations or the ways in which they are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are from the cutting of stones, and sharpening swords and knives, or spears or clubs, or similar objects; or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a bleeding that occurs on the neck, or head, or thighs, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs. And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple skull injuries, because memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 When a simple wound or fracture occurs and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's from a stone throw or similar causes, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound large; you should slightly suspect an abscess: promptly dress the head mainly if there is little blood flow from the wound, and position the bandage opposite to the affected area; avoid giving the patient repletion of wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he does not wish to dress it, make his portion of food small, and do not drink wine or eat meat; place on the wound where an abscess arises, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil only, or in medicated wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put ointment on the fresh wound with all its blood, as long as it's not moved by air or dust, of which I will say something later; and if it moves, apply some unguents until healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar to it, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures as I will describe for abdominal wounds in stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed of bone, and sharp, and holds only slightly, then bandage it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard leather to its place, and instruct the patient to eat large meats as tests and cooked wheat, also like eggs.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or leather putrefied, and it does not attach to the bone, completely cut off, then treat it with fat, and if there is an artery in the wound without a clot, which cannot be stopped by medicines, pierce the artery; and if that doesn't work, tie it with thread; and if nothing helps, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; and it is that you apply this powder which soothes as much as the art allows.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; lively salt three parts, and grind finely, apply to the wound, and hold firmly, until it airs well and joins with all its blood; then bind securely, and leave without slipping unless it swells.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this should not be done by fire alone unless you have the incense or blood of a dragon; but that the art must heal the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the wound has moved after being set, especially in this way, do not put on it this powder; but apply some digested ointments or finely ground barley flour mixed with water and honey until it heals well; then cure with other remedies until fully healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if there is a bone fracture with the wound, and it is small, extract using fine tweezers; and I will tell you here about head fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	From a wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and is simple, without a difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are severed in the neck.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, if there is no other remedy than to leave them untreated and put nothing that restrains them as they are harmful and cause retraction; do not place anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; but apply medicine similarly to a gently heated warm water bath, soaked in rose oil, mixed with olive oil, and cooked as such in warm water again, and other stone remnies in this manner, along with moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch it and bind with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wounds are deep and swollen with blood, pierce or go below them; if the arrowhead is stuck, and bleeding occurs, drain it, cleanse the wound, and cut away contaminated flesh as needed; and if a thorn in the throat is lodged, or there's an obstruction, follow its natural path to reposition according to how the tissue lies, and then gently stretch, leave untouched for some days, then treat with cleansing ointments until healed; and if bone has been compressed by injury, break it open; and if there are broken pieces of bone that you can pull through entirely, do so, and those you cannot retrieve should be left to become exposed and cleaned out before being aligned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound caused by a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then observe if there are any vapors coming from the wound that make the patient pale: know then that the wound is deadly; but if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put in any powder at first hour nor tie it to stop the blood flowing out fully, as it returns to the body and poisons the patient; instead use attractive ointment, and apply it twice a day. If you don't have an ointer, then put cotton wool into the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days or more; spasms, body tremors, or limb convulsions will not occur; and when you see favorable signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Care for it with bandages and other remedies until healed; and if it cannot heal or work, then suspect there is an abscess; treat the wound as one must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is a cut from a sword or knife and it is simple, or worse on the back, treat this according to what is before it; if it is large, bandage it; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in bone, containing pieces of metal, treat the wound itself, and extract the shafts if they are removed; and if not, let the wound dry out so that removing fragments becomes easier; and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	And rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The collapses of the belly are large and medium and small; from a great wound never leaks any intestine or nerves of the intestines, through which there is intrusion; and stitching is more difficult, and it does not always worsen with a small wound than with a large one, because when resetting the intestines more forcefully, they are placed back in without delay unless done gradually; for the intestine swells immediately once it feels cold, thus re-entering even more forcefully, and therefore less so with minor injuries, as I stitch the intestines to their proper place rather than elsewhere. Also know that the wound of the belly occurs in four ways: common sutures occur on the belly's wound, and those from other body wounds and two specific types are common; regardless, they are more suited with the belly' cuisine, and I will describe each and clarify.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the wound is small and there are no things from the bowels involved, and it's somewhat easy to put back, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swolwart due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten with an esponge or soft cloth with hot water only, or heat in boiling spring and salt and pepper, and inflame the intestines until they are no longer swollen; never repeat this so often, as it may cause damage.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling subsiding, moisten the intestines with hot water or boiled and vinegary solutions, because by this means the entry becomes less obstructed; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision at the instrument used to remove boils; the first treatment is to relieve pressure that none should cut without great necessity or proper indication: this is the incision for splitting.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When the wound is large and the intestines protrude, if you can reset it to its natural place in its proper location, because movement aids healing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is large and located below the abdomen, it is proper that you lay the patient on their back with legs raised higher than their head; if it's under the abdomen, raise the head and genitals higher than the lower parts; similarly, when a hernia is present in either of the two areas, position them so that the affected part is elevated above the other. Thus, you should follow my instructions for treating large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, first make an incision with a pointed object and gather the tissues in your hands; this is the common method for suturing, using needles or more as needed based on the size of the wound—leave a space at the head of the wound, then insert a needle with a strong thread line, perforating both layers of skin and bringing them together. Tie off one end of a double-threaded string around the needle's eye, suture the edges of the wound as you proceed, leaving space before inserting another needle; replicate this process until the entire wound is closed. Use medium-sized needles—neither too subtle to cut through tissue nor too thick not to enter properly: they should be moderate in size. Do not place stitches far from the incision and skin, as they won't effectively hold or protect the wound at its seam; after suturing with needles, remove their tips so that the patient does not latch onto them during sleep. Cover these points with bandages or cloths until the wound is closed by stitching—this method using multiple needles is more reliable for small wounds. In a similar case I treated, a man had an abdomamoinal wound from a cutlery injury; it was wider than one palm and included intestines of two palms in size.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestines as it had been XXIV hours since, and healed the wound until day fifteen, and treated him, and he was well again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the physician believed he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment, as there were none available in that location or any medicines; instead, twice daily for several days, I placed cotton soaked in honeyed water on the wound until healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Or here are the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle and thread it through until you reach near the cavity; when you feel the edge to be straight in line with where you inserted the needle, pierce from the other side into the cavity again; thus, this stitching method is like a furrier making furs, leaving one part of the suture complete and then returning it, until all are finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of suture, which Galien describes properly, is as follows: anyone who joins the two parts together naturally and applies one head of the suture to the other, in such a way - thread an awl or needle next to the wound only, and leave both heads of the suture; then turn the awl and pierce it from that part forward until inside; then pierce both from that part forward to where there are two more sutures on the opposite side; and this is the manner of suturing in which both ends are brought together, making it the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galen says this word, and some confirm it - one should sew the abdomen with two awls or needles, each having thread; and one must push through one awl from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and be aware that when the suturing is within the abdomen, it is more difficult than others.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgments of the wound are such as with other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound completely moved, thus reset the intestines and the bowels; then apply powder mixed with charcoal, and if the wound has been moved again, then apply any present ointment until the wound closes; then tie the thread, secure the bandage, and the compress; then treat the wound as other wounds, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, apply them as soon as it begins to weep slightly, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 In some conditions where wounds are simple, there is no need for additional medicine beyond certain arrangements of the wounds themselves; and if you suspect that the wound affects the main body parts, it is proper to mince linen lightly in lukewarm oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints and below the knees; and if there is pain or swelling throughout the limb, which often occurs, then administer a black wine enema, especially if the swelling reaches the intestines; and probe internally, noting that when dealing with large intestines, they are easier to heal than small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are in distress due to the size of the veins and their presence throughout the entire body, as well as the subtlety of all the organs and the proximity of its connection with the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 If the vein springs from the wound, reset it as you would an intestine when fresh; if it is old and turned or blackened, then remove the dark part to prevent bleeding, for there are veins and arteries present; then cut out what lies between the ligaments, and let two eyes hang down from below the wound until ejection occurs to ease extraction as veins burst, and the wound bulges.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of the eyelid
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine bursts and the wound is small, it can be restored in certain cases because I have seen a man suffer from an abdominal lance wound; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became swolled and turned into a fistula, causing discharge and flatulence; following what I could do, I provided care until it healed completely and fixed leaks.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it joined together, I doubted that the patient had harm in his belly; and there was no pain at all, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that for a small wound inside the intestine, it must be tied off partially: take fresh fat from large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the flap has opened its mouth, place it between the two edges so that it stretches out; and then you cover the head, and this holds firmly so that it cannot come apart, then put another flap afterward in the same manner until the entire wound is closed; and heal the ward.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 Their heads hollow out within the intestine, causing no harm to the patient, and one can reattach the intestine using a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal in this manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is mostly defecated, then tie it with a fine linen twisted thread, put the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine; this method of stitching by pus does not differ except according to the way of trust and hope. And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal lobes of the intestines, there is no remedy or healing save for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Regarding a fistula, or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Every wound or abscess, when it becomes ulcerated, is universally called "fistula", especially when it grows and becomes bowed back.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is caused by improper wound healing that becomes hard and pus-filled, where there is no pain felt, and it grows like the feathers of a bird; at times clear and curved backward, at other times thickened; sometimes soft, and at others sufficiently firm. In discussing wound types in my earlier division, any unhealed wound will have one of nine causes: namely, due to small blood loss or injury; or because it is inherently diseased; or because there is hardness inside and on the edges that does not allow for pus formation; or excessive swelling; or if the underlying tissue is rotten and the substance is of poor quality; or if the medication used is not appropriate for healing; or due to a type of putrefaction similar to plague; or because the region's properties delay digestion, health recovery, and natural healing; or there are bones or shards. I have already demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in my earlier division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula made by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Le fistule se fait en tous membres du corps; car il y a des fistules qui viennent aux grandes veines, aux artères, aux nerfs, ou au foie, ou à l'intestin, ou à la vessie, ou à certaines côtes, ou à la colonne vertébrale, ou à toute articulation des mains ou des pieds; et si il vient à une partie qui affecte le membre principal, ou aux autres parties.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All fistulas of this kind require a serious treatment and are only labor and ignorance; if there is any fistula that does not reach the location I mentioned earlier, but you have confidence in its cure and can observe it, then take a tent made of wax or iron - if the fistula is straight, use the tent as required; if the fabric is twisted, search for a delicate tent using plums because the plum fabric bends around the curvature; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly measure it with tents, then clisterize through one of the openings since moisture flows from one opening to another and cleanses it; afterwards, squeeze it firmly in your hand when you know if there are bones or nerves affected and whether it is filled entirely, ask the patient about the pain they feel upon pressure from your hand and the location where they experience this pain. Once you have accurately determined the location of the fistula - if it is far from a joint, vein, artery, or any of the locations I mentioned earlier, then perform the suture as instructed; remove other impurities within and cure until it is healthy; if the fistula has been dug in the correct location fully, you must dig into the base thoroughly. After that, place swabbed tents soaked with medicinal ague up to the top of the fistula until they corrode any excess material at the bottom; then apply ointments with healing ingredients until it is healthy again. If this does not work, cauterize as previously mentioned, and if there are bones affected by the fistula, excise them accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If veins or principal members are affected, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, with infection and blackness present, remove all of the infected bone until it is completely cleaned, then treat for various ailments until it is healthy again; and if not healed, create an opening like before, knowing you should not go too deep: expose and extract until reaching the bottom, removing all infection, then return to its place; if thus made healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the infection is too extensive to reach, and there is no other remedy but natural healing; and if there are small corrupted bones present, which you can extract with pincers, using a suitable instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, remove all of them without leaving any behind; and if moisture acts against it, causing neither error nor fear, then dry out the area, heal the wound, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 If you cannot remove them within an hour, place something unpleasant and putrid on the wound, allowing it to soften around the bones until they are almost exposed; then the bones will be more easily reduced. And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, repeatedly apply corruption until all bone is seen, then close the wound; and if there is a significant part of the corrupted bone, approaching up to the softness of the bone; it should be covered entirely up to the corruption, and then treated until solidified; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid from your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Once there was a young man not more than thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause that came into the body until substances reached the leg and it fled due to a large abscess, without any apparent reason for opening; but physicians by their folly worked so much on it that they opened the abscesses, and consumed much matter, becoming fistulas, and there was great discharge everywhere in the skin of the body; many doctors applied treatment for two years, with no knowledge in the art of hands until I was called to him, and saw his leg and the medicines used on him, and what flowed through the orifices into a large part of the body; becoming red were the body parts of the young man, and he had citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I built a tent on one of these points, and then searched all the points, finding that each comes in opposition from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 So I hurried on then, and cut into one of these points as long as I discovered a part of the bone, finding it corrupted and perforated, extending corruption to the inner bone; I considered what appeared from the corrupted bebone, thinking there was no other corruption except that which I showed; and began treating the wound with medicinal powders for a long time, but could not sew; and then resumed, discovering the bone as before, finding continuous corruption in the bone, and tending to it, and then revealing it, and tried to sew up there; however, I could not sew past cutting half an inch of the bone, which led to its entire rupture, so I restored it with medicines again; and it became healthy and quickly stitched, and did not start the operation again except due to the weakness of the patient who couldn't bear it, and from fear of his death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For often the evacuation of blood was bloody, but he recovered completely, and in place of the bone there arose a hard cartilage, which was well-shaped and had no harm or drawback at all, neither on arrival nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any place within the body, it must be treated thus: take a ligature, and strain the head of the fractured bone, commanding that no one stretches it upwards; then tie another thicker thread than the first, to which you bind above the hardening tissue over the bone, and stretch the head so as to cut away the rotten cartilage at its base, revealing the normal cartilage underne. Place a splinter or small stick beneath the bone for support of the corrupted cartilage; it must be done until you can see and feel the end of the decay, and then treated further if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted but does not open and the corruption is in a part or within, reveal the entire wound; then place a hot application underneath, then move from one side of the corruption to the other, making it as long as possible as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, separate the corrupted joint, moving the bone that contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, there are no other remedies but to cover; and if the corruption is at the thumb or toe of the hand, foot, then it is a very strong thing indeed, yet you must seek out that corrosion as how it opens for you; and cleanse in all ways possible, but that vein or nerve does not cause opposition; know that the incision tool and stitches for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance thereof, and their size and delicateness, and their greatness and smallness, and hardness; and therefore it is necessary to equip each kind of operation with its instrument; know that the work will show you which instrument you need, according to knowledge of this art, and evidence from the ways diseases manifest themselves; so consider the instrument needed as dictated by what is proper.
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If the head is bruised or by reason of foulness, or due to lack; and when you have administered that remedy with healing medicines, but they do not help, then cover up the affected limb until it reaches the place where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient may escape from death's door or by malevolence, which is greater due to the failure of the limb; and the sign is such that the limb turns black, as though scorched by fire, and then follows the darkness, for the corrosion spreads from one member to another throughout the body; if you act quickly in covering it up, and if it's due to the sting of venomous creatures like sea scorpions, snakes, or similar, if the corrosion is at the top of the knee joint, then cover it, and do not give any respite until it reaches the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If it comes down to the hand, cover the joint, so corrosion does not reach up to the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then coat with wax; and if it passes the wax, it is death, and no treatment can be made except for the quantity of its virtue; thus do whatever is done when corrosion comes or grows: if it comes to the first joint, cover after the next joint; and if it comes upward, coat the entire limb; and if it rises into the leg, then coat at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than a ligature for the patient facing death; the manner of taping or bandaging the member is such that you bind above and below, extend some ties from one end of the binding to the other, and untie the stitches which are between the two bindings wide enough so that the bone is exposed. Then coat with wax or cloth, and place a linen strip on each side, so that the coated area does not touch the healthy part, causing the patient further injury and pus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if blood flow occurs while working, promptly cauterize the wound with hot iron or apply certain binding powders; then return to your medicinal treatment until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man who was asleep: he had a blackening that appeared like fireburn, and this corrosion first came upon his right toe all the way up to consume the entire foot; when the man saw the corrosion, he quickly covered the foot with cowhide, and it became healthy again; after many years the corrosion returned on his hand, and it came to me, and I treated him with things following body purification, but could not stop the corrosions; and he asked that I amputate his hand, although I hoped by reflection of treatment to prevent further spread; and I also doubted whether if I simply cut his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak; and he despaired completely, returned to his land, and covered his hand with cowhide, becoming healthy again; and I have not told you this as an example of what is done in a similar situation when necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Never comes an abscess in its place, and it lingers so long that it forms a large mass of pus; then they burst and penetrate, the pus oozes out, and the eye orbits remain swollen like small balloons; and the skin which is above is as delicate as torn fabrics, not reaching all the way to the bone nor nerve, such illness is called "healed" and it's not called "fistula"; but if it becomes so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "febris fistulae". The skin needs to be cut open entirely around, especially when it is as delicate as torn fabrics; and does not worsen due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If you believe that the skin is hardened and not at its full extent, and if the skin is of tanned hide in such a manner: then do thus with an enema as follows: check if the cheeks are large, and whether the bow which is there has a foul odor; then clisterize with Egyptian medicine made this way: take ease, and oil, and litargyrion in equal parts, and cook it in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; and then take from it according to your need, and mix it with water and h지mel, and clisterize the cheeks, and strain the passageways; leave the medicine for two hours, then squeeze out. Do this many times until the cheeks are made firm again, and have no discharge; never use an enema of water from ashes when this Egyptian medicine is present, but instead take ashes from a vinewood and pour water over it, then strain it and for an enema until you know that the cheeks are well set and no longer leak; if the patient cannot bear either the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clisterize with just water and honey mixed with a little litargyrion, or use honey and mead vinegar so that the honey has the property to purify and cleanse, and the wine makes it potent; after doing this, when you are sure that the cheeks are well set, then clisterize with what brings out hair in them, using oil roset and wine. If there is still doubt, use other medicines and ointments as described earlier for their properties or treatments; if the passageways of the cheeks are small and cannot hold the enema, widen it slightly with a piece of iron wire, and apply an egiptian ointment or basilicon until they are sufficiently wide.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bow is at full length, do not let it become bent; and if you cannot cover the heart from below as you see fit, arrange it so that the bow points to the lowest point where possible, for when the bow is fully extended, it should not be allowed to bend, and if you cannot cover the heart from below as you see fit, adjust accordingly: allow the bow to fall gently downward without letting anything touch the bow; and take consolidating medicines to place over the wound, using a linen wrap that covers the entire area. Then cover the forceful spot on the chest slightly wider than the first with another piece of cloth according to the amount of the depression, and apply soothing ointment under this second layer of fabric, placing it upon the depression to relieve tension in the bow without removing the large linen wrap until after many days have passed; and for those placed over the chaboncle on the chest, frequently remove them, ascertaining from where the pain originates, whether it is venom or minor or moderate, or digested, or indigestion. Be watchful if the patient feels pain or nausea, or if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread according to this method and you observe the nature that appears under the depression on the chest, understand that the chest will be more relaxed, and health will approach; then release it in the morning, or the next day, and once the wound is cleansed, change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become foul with indigestion after many days, believe that the breasts are not angry.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle corns come after long periods of time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are cases where patients delay with charms in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if a swollen breast persists after many days, know that the breasts have not improved at all; and if they become hardened and enlarged later on, apply dried medicines of moist substance but dry effect, like an oil solution, with rose oil mixed equally in substance; then blend it and use it. Likewise, do the same with cooked honey thickened more if dyafinit ointments are not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and powder over honey as soon as it is heated on fire; then mix it in a cloth, apply to the breast, and do not use arsenolite frequently, nor lis celestial root, which is like wheat flour or bran; and use simple remedcuies or compounds: grind them, make into powder, add honey as mentioned before, and use it. If the condition persists and does not respond to this treatment, understand that corruption is spreading through and applying pressure on bones, hardened limbs, or ligaments; then apply fistula curatives as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the nail's abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A boil is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or occasionally in other fingers; and when it matures, and no care is taken, so comes the abscess to burst, and run and ooze blood until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly all the way through; leading to corrosions reaching the bone, causing such intense pain, with a swollen finger, and a discolored appearance.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have explained in the section, and if the treatment does not succeed, then you must cut out all the excess tissue associated with the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The caustic is of great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound; and if the nail after touches the skin, and begins to throb, and swell, then it's necessary that you place a thin layer underneath the nail so that the blood doesn't flow, and direct it upward, and carefully extract the subtle blood, and apply on what remains of the affected area medicines with heating and corrosive properties to remove all; then treat with ointments until healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if there is corrosion in the bone, and you extract it, and treat it deeply because as long as the bone corrodes like this, it cannot heal; and if you see the joints being consumed, then extract them as previously stated, and treat until healthy; and if they are severe, and filled with blood, causing great pain, first soothe the patient; then remove the nail with a sharp instrument across from above, but be careful that the cut does not reach to the bone underneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it occurs, apply something on top which calms.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of dislocation is felt from below at the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The dislocation that is found in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh, and sometimes there are bones present, and at times none; these do not originate from the root of the joint where they are formed.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one that originates in any of the two bones does not move, and the one that originates at the joint of the two bones may sometimes move; the size of the fleshier one is lighter, for instance: measure it from its root by a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat; hold them with your hand cup.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For the one that originates from behind or beside the nearest bone, it is necessary to first cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate sawing motion, and then heal it until it is sound again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Dislocations arise from a joint being out of its place, occurring either by birth, or by incision wounds, or scorching with fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to cover the swelling so that it may heal according to its natural form; then place between two cloths or linens oiled with oil of roses, ensuring they do not stick together; or put between two pieces of fine plaster, until the joint is healed as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sensation comes to any of its fingers with the palm, then bandage accordingly as it should be.
des vils	 The wretched ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large swellings wrapped and filled with excessive melancholy that come upon various body members; more frequently it occurs in the legs of those who walk on their toes and work and carry loads than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must provide them relief from pus at any time, and then clean the bladder ache with camphor.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment with iron is in two ways: one method is to cover it and then bleed the black blood; and the other way is to lift the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The manner of this treatment is as follows: first raise the leg with hot water until the large area feels sensitive but not overwhelmingly so, then support the leg above the hip to just below the knee; then puncture the vein in one place, either two or three times, using a wide lancet, then extract and drain the black blood by hand from top to bottom until as much is removed as the virtue of the patient can tolerate; and then stop it, instructing him to dress with fat-blackening substances; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are filled again, causing discomfort to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The procedures of this treatment are as follows: raise the limb with pain on the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and warm up the limb with hot water until it turns red, causing the veins to swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, and then press gently on the vein at the top of the shin or in the area above the ankle; then work the skin around the knuckles, and scrape each vein until they appear when felt; it will look red and black, and when inserted into the cord appears as white. Then place a strap underneath, until it rises to the skin level, then attach it lightly to another loop two inches higher; then scrape the skin on top of the vein until seen, then lift with the strap as done before, and attach it to another knuckle, as done previously; then apply another bandage or more if needed, then lift, and wrap around the foot's knee, then drag and raise up to the second joint; then scrape the skin on top of the vein until seen, then untie from the first strap, so done beforehand, and attach it to a different knuckle; then apply another bandage or more if needed, then lift, and wrap around the ankle'cu
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the vein is twisted and wrapped together, not being straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly but do not cover it up completely, and treat it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to clamp the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it constricts the vein; and it has a large curve because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, this is the form:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is rooted in legs, warm areas where there are no plants or trees, and on land without moisture; occasionally it appears elsewhere than the legs, occurrcuing from the rot that comes from under the skin, as it occurs within the body serpents and vessels, entwined between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 When the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it causes great swelling in the leg, then the lice change, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head is opened, it must be wrapped around with a piece of linen from one to two and a half pints until two pints, along with honey, leaving the linen on the leg, and each time if it does not leak, wrap it around the linen and gauze; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remainder, without covering it completely at its root, as long as all material can be issued; for if you cover it, it will re-enter the flesh, causing an abscess and decay or putrefaction there, leading to serious illness; therefore, this vein must be treated little by little until completion, leaving no leftover tissue or bones; and there is never a time when this vein is left untreated after being cut from five to ten pints, and one man came to me with it protruding ten pints long, and as soon as you cover it, three stitches or punctures are made, which are completely pierced until all material comes out; the inner substance is emptied, and prepare for the next day an antiseptic mixture without any putrefaction, then heal it like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 At no time during this vein bleeding, especially when it bursts in the joint of the foot or ankle, and much blood comes out, so reset as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Between skin and flesh where new vessels arise
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This illness is known in our land as "ox disease" because it often occurs in the bladder and consists of small worms that arise between skin and flesh, moving up and down throughout the body causing pain wherever they pass through the skin until they exit; it also causes an infestation with various humors, such as serpents, earthworms, and roundworms or intestines. Doubt about its nature arises when it travels along the body, moving up to the head, coming out near the eyes, sometimes returning inward, and destroying them; this occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being cared for and drawn out, one cannot force it when moving: therefore, it must be tied above and below a strong joint tightly, then wrapped with bandages and pulled through, if the vessel is entirely blocked in the cartilage, if not found, cautionize with fire upon it until it moves; and the greatest harm it causes is that they run to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye, tightly strain below it then bandage above, and pull through; one must use the patient for body purification of medicinal soluble substances for evil humors, and wash with putrefying meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 From the pain which arises from swelling caused by wind.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "wakir" in our land and is pain that occurs in some limbs, shifting from one member to another; and this is what I see for you to tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sickly woman, and I discovered swollen arms, and I saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm; and shortly after, I noticed it rising like an insect on the shoulder faster than anything else, similar to how silver quickly changes from one place to another; the pain left that location, moved to the shoulder, and then spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me it returned inside her body as though I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	by:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Nevertheless, I had wanted to make the pain move from its place elsewhere, but I could not see it in the woman; and I thought it was because her body was dry, and veins exposed, causing constricted winds; and those who are delirious do not show signs according to this reason, and who have moist bodies with reopened veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to treat this illness and the patient feels that pain if it opens as we have said, quickly cut above and below swiftly; then cauterize at the place where constrained winds occur; and treat like stagnant wounds using foul pills or serpentine pills and similar remedies.
des saiettes	 Of arrow extractions
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	the pain: oughts (a, then heal sofes d, and if they ct; t;
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The various types of them are such that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and attached; and those that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those which break into pieces; and the one that breaks off from any part does so in two ways: either as the main parts do, like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it breaks off from any of these parts, and the sign of death that I shall tell you about next becomes apparent: it is necessary for you to extract this arrowhead because death approaches in various forms; and if this ill omen does not become evident, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then treat (the wound) and heal the injury.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow enters and pierces the bone is that it jerks the scalp forcefully which lies over the brain; it causes scotoma, soreness, straining, redness in them all, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and muddled thinking, vomiting of bile; and sometimes without strength in the nostrangs or ears; and perhaps speech and voice are affected; and there is a wound moist white appearing like hairs, and it bleeds as if burned by fire; and when you see this sign, hold to treatment, and track down the arrow unless it has already exited.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the arrow when it passes through the body is that it lies close to the left breast and feels as if embedded in a hard object, not hollow; and occasionally the arrow moves like hairs, with black blood coming out, accompanied by coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then you have reason to suspect death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	the durt; and there (as aul se ues benc!
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters near the surface of the breastbone, it is close to the ribs; and there is much blood loss, great pain and groans; and they move all parts of the shoulder blades.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, perhaps from a wound not affecting any of the indigestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder and urination is interrupted and comes out forcefully, causing the patient great pain: understand that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other parts - as made by the collarbone, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, forearm and legs, and similar limbs - are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to some men that an arrow struck them in the root of the nose; I tried it, and pulled it from one side over the fat of the ear, and it was found sound without wound.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled another arrow that entered the fat of the eye near the papered edge, and the arrow was reset, allowing only its tip to touch the bone at the end, and it was a large Turkish bow arrow with any light metal but no ears; the joint was sound, and nothing unfortunate befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arabic arrow with ears: I straightened the fletchings and carefully extracted it until the Christian was sound again.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 When a patient has been struck by an arrow in the abdomen and one thought they would die; and then after thirty days had passed, their condition did not change; I cut below the arrow, guided it, withdrew it completely, and there were no adverse consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 If an arrow falls on someone's back and the wound is sealed above it, and remains lodged within them, their natural conditions do not change or find harm in any of their natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And for another man who is struck by an arrow on his face, the wound was sealed; and it remained there causing great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 When an arrow struck a person among the king's princes, and it was lodged mid-forehead, leaning slightly to the right; and the arrow was completely driven in. I was called for treatment after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And yet it was all subtly tied up, and I did not feel it; but it caused him to have pressure and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead and applied a poultice to alleviate inflammation since his eyes were not swollen; and then the arrow's barb appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I applied the poultice for a long time and then suctioned the wound thoroughly, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told it to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive poultice to the wound for days until it opened up, and tried removing part of the arrowhead, and felt the tip leaving its place; then, nearing the opening of the wound with another corrosive poultice, as long as the arrow's head became clearly visible. It took nearly four months to break down completely before I managed to extract it by inserting pliers on both sides, but it could not be removed. Then I persisted in subtly manipulating and devising different methods of extraction until, after one day with well-fitted pliers according to the form that will appear at the end of this chapter as described, I successfully extracted it and left the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I will reset it immediately, and the wound is healed, and the patient becomes entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have told you the quality of arrow extraction; attend to what is urgent, as the book cannot fully address everything; but wise masters in this field can handle great things and those that are present or failing, accomplish nine works with nine instruments, dealing with strange matters occurring in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows lodged in the limbs are fixed either where they enter or from another direction; and those that exit through their entry point are intranasal arrows entering living tissue, and never do so more than once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not fit now, leave it until the joint is completely loose and freed; if it is embedded in the bone and cannot be removed, let it remain so for several days, moving each day; then eventually it will come out, and if it still does not, carefully pierce around with a very fine needle until the area inside is widened, then extract.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is embedded in the skull and reaches one of the brain's ventricles, causing any of the events I have mentioned to occur; do not attempt to pull it out but leave it so that it becomes equal after several days, because if it moves upward like this, it will cause death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 If the arrowhead is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the sinew, and the patient suffers for some days without serious injury, then try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck thus and cannot come out, then apply tourniquets around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals soundly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrowhead is reset in the body and cannot be seen, then carefully examine all around it; and if you can feel it, extract using a suitable instrument; and if unable to do so due to the wideness of the wound or depth of the arrowhead, and there are no bones, nerves, or tendons, fence in as long as the wound is large; extract the arrowhead where you can feel it, and if it has ears to which it holds on, break off the part that is stuck inside using the force you can apply, then snap or bend those ears of the arrowhead until you can pull it out; do so carefully, as breaking the arrowhead would make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	:
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 If the condition of blood turns contrary, follow the treatment as we have mentioned in its chapter; and be careful with the incision on the nerve and vein, and use a method to extract the arrowhead without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to their form when the arrow fell upon them, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do so, follow as the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 For an arrow that comes from elsewhere and has opened something within it or the skin is swollen in some spot if one sees or feels abnormally: thus cut above, as long as the pincers can take hold of it, and then extract; if it jumps out forcefully now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull through.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 If it cannot be removed, let it remain for now, and then resume extraction as long as it continues to move; if the arrowhead is in there, push with all your strength; if it breaks, administer pressure treatment, using an instrument that fits, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the handle of the tool; then apply force, and if the arrowhead comes out, insert the instrument pointedly, to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is embedded, it's necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can see it; then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the arrowhead breaks or pierces the belly, bladder, or ribs, and it's close by, expose it if you can see it; cut around it if necessary. Be careful not to cut any veins or nerves while extracting, then treat the wound as needed; continue care until healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	so's; heal Jue, and l’t les s.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the pointed hair is also like the feathers of a bird, to thrust at the tip of the arrowhead, as here is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pliers for pushing and picking is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	de la.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins from which blood is drawn are XXXI in number, of which there are sixteen heads: II arteries called "herbech" located behind the ears; and two arteries that appear on each temple; II veins within the eyelids called "aspires"; a vein amidst the forehead; a vein underne.the brow; and II veins named guindeges in the neck; and II veins inside the upper lips above the mouth, also known as "augeherich"; and two veins located below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins which are commonly bled in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is located near the left side of the collarbone; they call this "vein of the head." And the other is called "fast," composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call this "vein of the body"; and the basilic is on the right side of the collarbone, and it's called "vein of the abdomen," and it's under the armpit, and that's the one which is bled openly upon the pouchet.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The saphenous is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, with two branches; in the leg where there are three veins: one above the frog of the inner side collarbone, and the second femoral which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "saphena," located at the other ankle; and in the other leg there are also three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 Li pusorium des voinnes qui sont après les oreilles aide aux anciennes catarres et à la migraine; and the quality of the poultice, as I have told you, is to raise the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then press the neck with two fingers until the veins protrude behind the ears in pairs depending on the height of the skull: then pinch them at your thumb and index finger, gently; then take the lancet, and cut to the bone just beneath the vein, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein towards the source, and strip and remove both sides of the skin and fat well around two fingers wide, and let out blood until you see it; then compress and tie off, until clean; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The source of the two arteries that are in both temples should be opened early with a well-established method and skillfully done, causing tears from their eyes; the quality of the vessel is as I describe: it requires the patient to extend his neck until the veins appear clearly. Then feel for pain behind your ears, then press firmly on them; lift your hair at the vein level above your index finger, and place the lancet below, release the blood upwards from the vein, as you have done with other veins, bleed according to your necessity, then bind off the patient, and let it heal until clean; this we know well by talking about their bandaging and extraction, or where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The bandage on the forehead is just as valuable for old facial illnesses, and migraines, and reddening; and its quality is such that patients twist their neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the point above the vein, and raise it with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck, and bandage the vein so that it is flat and not once the work of a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary for the flames to be too large; and the shin across, for the bone is near, and by chance it may break the flames when they are slender.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The bandage for the veins located in two temples is beneficial to the eyes, and twitching, and reddening, and orbital pain, and facial diseases; its quality allows patients to twist their neck without any restraint as before; then the bandaging technique involves a little long piece of fabric with a slightly wide flame.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the moistness is subtle, perhaps it may burst; then make clean of blood, as much as you need, and then apply woolen cloth, and wrap it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The condition of the vein in coldness is worth little heat, and drying out, and illnesses of face, such as migraines and rashes that come on the face, especially when it is aged; and the qualities of this condition are such that patients grip their neck tightly, then strain their nose to your left hand, taking a long thin thread, inserting it between the two nostrangs, because veins do not open fully, and blood begins to flow immediately. Do not go too deep at first, make the bleeding according to necessity, then tie it off, leave for one night, as it is quickly restored; this is the form of the flax thread.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The leech of the II veins aids in stretching the limbs, beginning salves, treating various illnesseblack rot, herpes, and itchiness; and its quality is such that the patient pulls his neck away from both sides as we have said; and be on top of the chief where the patient sits, and the patient bites on a piece of leather, then strains the vein widely for a while, then bleeds the blood quickly or as much as needed; then relocate it to the other vein, detach the ligaments, and grip both veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle himself; and leave him until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of spleen fever
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of veins in the lips above helps with boils inside the mouth, and decay of gums, cracks in the lips, and bleeding and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of this spleen fever is to seat the patient in front of you and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, recognizing them by being black and having small dark spots around them: thus cut both, and if you do not recognize them, or are in doubt, cut the largest from each side, and likewise for all veins above and below, as they are of the same kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of spleen fever under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The spleen fever of the veins under the tongue follows that of the headache and is found with throat ailments and mouth diseases; the quality of this fever is to seize the patient by the hands in front of the sun, lift their tongue, and look for black veins on each side below: thus cut both, but do not go too deep underneath, as these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins of which we commonly bleed in the usual manner: either by puncturing to any extent with a wide catheter, or using an olive-like delicate one as sharp as cutting blades, and they are called "anesil"; and both wide and delicate according to the width and extension of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of this flail mistle is much renowned, and wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open those veins that have plainly visible thick blood and contain thick, turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive-like lancet.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	Et c'est plus subtilement pointu, et pour soulager les veines subtiles, où le sang est subtilement citrin.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, collarbone, elbow, and abdomen; it must be bled properly by the leech and then cleansed from the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if it grabs the artery and blood flow diminishes, then it must be cauterized as I have said; but the flame should not burn the flesh, but cut like a sickle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must extract it, and change to another one; or you want some part of its rain, or suture in place near its vein: it opens clearly; and cauterize with the flame like a sickle as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you discern the origin of the sinew, then as you extract the arm, touch its origin until you recognize the hairs; then sign the origin with a cross, and then bind the arm, and causticate the vein with the flame like a sickle; beware not to wound the artery when you see it swell, for it is an artery: thus avoid.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it protrude upward like the urine of a child, and its surface is red and subtle, understand that it's from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger underneath for a long time, then remove your finger when it becomes unyielding, as often happens; if the arm is involved, leave it like this, and do not move the affected area; let there be fear, and do not move until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	* (contract as la  and they are not so far the res that. Theires c s[o;d. Jnezet this by their t – i. If you cannot. This is in the firste;
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a slice of fitchet, and cut it, then take one half and apply until the next day; if it becomes unyielding, that is good; if not, treat with powders that coagulate blood; the stiffness does not always align in various positions due to the small location of the wound and its impact on the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein opening assists greatly as it allows blood to flow above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilar and cerebral parts, as we have said; and the surgeon should soothe themselves for the nerve that lies beneath, and if they extend too much, they may find the nerve, which then swells and becomes irritated, and sometimes cannot heal; this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, one should anesthetize with instruments.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves and it feels long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The brain surgery assists greatly as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one should surgeon by gripping with an olive or mirtin stone, for this is the most healing of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath them.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Always seek the more comfortable position, and do not burden oneself in the first attempt, then try again; sometimes the joints swell in some men when attempting for the first time, but they should not be bothered by it.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is as you think.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about fasting is that it is not practiced only to maintain health and avoid future diseases; there are three ways to practice fasting: cephalic (before meals), festal, and basilical; one should begin fasting before dinner in spring and autumn, as well as after eating during winter when signs of fullness appear; it is advised to fast on the first or second day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healing remedy for illnesses does not have a set time, but when needed during the day or night, at all hours and times; and it is not appropriate to apply this treatment to children up to fourteen years old, nor to women carrying a child for more than seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And should not be suckled the elderly who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When one wishes to administer treatment in any manner, it is necessary that they prepare the intestines with a gentle enema if there is too much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw excessive substances harmful to essential body parts; nor should you treat those who are overly depleted by food or liquor (alcohol), regardless of whether they are strong or weak, nauseous, and after suffering from colic-like conditions, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination in women, excessive travel, lack of sleep, and intercourse; and whatever the essence may be due to a weapon injury or other causes. Then subtly remove the humors if you are overweight through foods and drinks as well as medications that you have available; then take a bath, unless something prevents it, in order to refine the blood, and treat the veins near the buttocks (as mentioned before), while avoiding strenuous activity, strain, indulgence, and similar actions on the day of treatment. Hold oneself together, cheer up, and use more than what is applied to others; rub the arms twice or thrice, then gently extract the ligature halfway, because if it's too tight or loose, you cannot straighten them properly; then rub the lower back with hands until the veins swell and become sensitive, then apply a small amount of old oil to moisten, placing your left hand on the affected vein near the buttocks where desired for treatment, enscuing that the vein does not tear or be injured by needle.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee as cords in the arm, and some of which are flat from windiness, so when placed over the flame, it retracts to the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus they are those types; and if one opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore one must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	line.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the flesh is swollen and the patient hopes, leaving it for a day or two without binding the arm: sometimes abscesses may come forth; do not bathe it again until the wound heals if you wish so; and if the fistulae are small or subtly cut open by the skin, doubt whether it does not bleed as much as you see, then fierily through that same fistula with all the flame directly; and work the vessel a bit hastily so that the flesh may swell again, for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the limb swollen, do not continue with bandaging it again, and apply a bit of oil atop, for it eases their pained bodies, and softens what is stuck in this place by the oil; thus treat each vein with oil as you cleanse them, to stop the blood flow; similarly, employ poultices and bowels when applied on top of the limb; subtle they are and separate easily if too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there are large abscesses that often occur, especially when the opening of the vein is small and one rushes, apply a moist sponge soaked in vinegar and seal it warmly for an hour; then proceed to make something after the blood from the vein drains, and if it remains at the place after several days without discoloration or greening, do not harm it further; and if you see anything apply aloe juice, myrrh extract, or a similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the sickness in the basin-like area: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the lump tender under pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then putting anything on what we have said, for it may happen without an artery being cut; but give it a dry plaster to harden the lump, and then apply another salve until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see a large amount, allow it to decrease until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it should be for those who are plain and outside, and need blood extraction, that more wide wounds are made, and the furrows are broad; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, make them little and often, and in trimming diagonally, not by poking; and this way of healing prevents excessive bleeding and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide cuts.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for those whose body needs healing, give them flour bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are weakened, feed them the bread three or four times; and if of a cold constitution, provide honeyed moist bread with syrup, or sweet syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, well scented.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If it occurs at the temple, after the issue of a great amount of blood, then one should inhale a mixture of charcoal and odorous syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arms, and use leeches at other times as needed, when they are greatly swollen by moisture, let him bleed a little bit and a little bit continuously depending on the quantity of his vitality.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	t c; they have sfite and:
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to treat another part, it must be treated on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there are much blood within the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; then one must drain a great quantity, and widen the opening as far as possible; afterward tend to all conditions of bleeding, and place your hand under hairs when healed, so death does not occur in the area of the orifice, which happens often when caregivers are negligent. Moreover, there is no need when you see that it has been untied twice, and the opening is closed, press firmly on both sides; but if it is swollen, extend the arm hastily, for this would be wrong; instead, let it heal a second time completely, until the blood clot in the vein opening comes loose, and apply some water to soothe the area gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, let it remain unbound until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding of blood is necessary, let it be bled in the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is bled where the head of the vein lies because it is composed in that manner.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The method of the sanies is such that patients immerse their hand in hot water until the fingertips are red; then they apply it so that the veins appear well, then wash down through, neither too wide nor too long; and ensure the puncture holes are large, and placed close to the joint of the hand where no blood can escape. If not enough blood is drawn, re-immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it until sufficient amount is collected; if it's winter time, do not skip this step as more blood flows during winter than summer; and the sanies from this vein is safer from all other methods, as there are no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The physician of the left hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: stretch the right hand and dip in hot water until the vein is emptied; if the sinew is crossed and you grasp it completely, do not injure anything; and do not pull too hard, because the nerves are just beneath the skin, and then place the hand back in hot water, if the sinew is frozen at the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have addressed the bleeding as much as necessary, apply oil and wax to the vein and quickly join them together, doing this with each thread.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The remedy for the illness in the left hand is as follows, do exactly as I have told you with the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The physician of the knee is effective for all diseases under the body such as joint pains, retention of urine, diseases of the kidneys, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient will pour hot water on their wound and rub it until it cools, and then wrap above the joint near the foot; and the bandage should be at the ankle, and from there go out quite a lot like streams; cleanse it well either where wider streams occur or at the ankle, whichever allows movement.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you dislocate the joint above the foot, watch for nerves that are below it and cut through as in skinning; and let the bone fragments be joined similarly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sinew cannot exit, reset the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the treatment fails at first, start again slightly above a bit later, for the head is swollen; do not hesitate to cut nerves as we have said, and thus perform similar surgery on the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle near strong, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to blood heat.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The quality of his health is such that the patient enters or bathes, and extends above the ankle with four fingers in twisting motions, as otherwise it won't open the bandage; and if it opens, then cleanse it in all manners you can, including across; and move it enough to cut off the excess, for the head is swollen, and it has grown back quite a bit with hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 If you do not succeed in finding it, take any part of him that is open or through the back to the two elbows, and towards the small finger, and watch for nerves; and make as much pressure on the blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put cotton over it and bind tightly; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 Of the buboes of cupping therapy
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made from horns, or ivory, or glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping therapy is done in two ways: one using very hot fire and the other without heat; and the cupping performed by bleeding and extracting blood occurs on fourteen parts of the body: one at the head; another at the neck; others on both sides of the neck; under the chin; over the shoulders; above the knees; along both arms; along both legs; below the ankles. The cupping does not involve bleeding, but rather tiny drops scattered in the flesh, so it is tolerable for everyone, as done with venous bloodletting; and it should be properly managed without using either very hot or no heat in any disease that arises from excess, until all body parts are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 If it becomes necessary due to illness or customs, we shall offer each one in the beginning of the month, or at its end, and every day; for there are those who, when they need to be bled, feel heavy heads; and there are those who experience fullness and redness on their face, head, and neck, with darkness in their eyes; and such as have a drop of blood in their mouth, swelling tongue, and spit blood. And some think, see through bloodshot and pained expressions and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order to bleed after 3 and a half hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The bleeding of the brain helps with greatness of the head that comes to them, and it is not necessary after evacuating all the body; this bleeding serves for the cerebral ailment, and only those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh should use it, as it causes much harm; thus, night-watchers nor those with head colds should not practice it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	the unt les deux they are;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 Ventilation within the neck is in place of the healthy head and base, and therefore it involves stretching the thighs, fracturing the channel of the pudendum, and everything else, including repletion; one should not apply too much force, because if held too firmly, it may cause disobedience or stomach issues and affect the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Ventilation between the second ribs of the neck can cause pain in the head, swelling and migraines, constriction, and pain at the root of the dens; it is in place of healthy base. You must instruct the surgeon to gently express his hand upon insertion, without cutting the artery or causing blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The incisions from below the chin indicate diseases of the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as similar ailments that are found inside the mouth; they occur near the sores on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Incisions in the shoulders indicate diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventriculations of the elbows are equivalent to those of three veins in the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and you command the physician not to pierce too deeply, because the flesh is hard here, and it knows glands and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	and m ct is not n’s.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the veins of the legs are bled openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are as effective as ancient remedies for rains, stones in the bladder, and kidney pain; and reset the flours (sweating); and are at the two knees, and on both ankles, and always weaken the body after long use, bringing about numbness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first when empty and quickly draw out blood, doing so hastily, moving evenly, and not stopping until you see the spot reddened and swollen with a hint of darker blood; then firm up, replace the cups, and observe the condition of the body for those who have tanorexia (itching) or clear pores. If necessary to puncture only once, make broad and somewhat deep incisions, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, you must puncture twice: the first time to fine-tune the path of the blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	When blood is copiously flowing, it must be stopped the third time; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we wish to draw a lot of blood, begin often; and if the flesh is spongy, pierce deeply, and finish so that the head be swiftly punctured, and it is suitable for those with thick and hard skin, who have various pains: grease the elbow ventricules with oil aperitive and dissolvent. If this is the case, use violet oil or almond oil, or seed of cucurbite; if this is a leaf, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 If the one to whom you provide a tender and broad bandage does not need oil, then it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or blackthorn berry water, or gourd water, or porcelain stone water, or any similar liquid.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, using myrtle water or sumac and other similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those who have excessive swelling should rise from old wine or blackthorn berry water, or aniseed water, or nettle or chamomile decoction, or similar liquids; they are not to be bathed with a leech bath before or after the bath but two hours after the bath. They must not sleep after ventosation and should rub themselves when they need to be leeched and are ready for it.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And let him who is seized by colic and whose body is too hot and inflamed take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with ease, and similar things; mixed punches, and cherry oil, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And he who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is half old and half new, with some porridge and punches, small birds, and ducks; and for each day he fasts, he must drink more than eat; it is necessary to give triacle or musk before the vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; but only those who are hot should take it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The suction cups that are applied without injuring are those placed on the liver, and on the knee, and gout, and on the belly, back, joints, and calf, because this limb cannot be injured anywhere, and it is done only to draw blood from one part of the body to another as we do with nipples when they are not healing; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and back to reduce swelling; and removes pain, if there is obstruction or stone, so it may draw out the blockage by its attractive power by chance, or deserts the stone from its place; thus, it works when placed on the liver and knee when viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are prepared empty to drain as much as needed; and sometimes filled with fire, and other times with plain water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction cup is filled with hot water or water in which it has boiled herbs suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it has two ends of half a palm in width and around the middle a small hole, like threading a needle with silk, and be of wool on front so that it does not bother the patient when placed on the limb; and have in the middle a bar made of wool or iron, to hold a candlewick, and they should vary in size large and small according to diseases and the nature of those who use them; for children's blisters are different from old ones, and thin as opposed to fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this is how you should place the blister pack on the limb: take a taper candle or oil, and insert it into the bar in the middle of the blister, ensamuch that the light shines at the bottom of the blister without burning the patient; then place it on the limb, with the two ends as we mentioned earlier, so that when desired, steam is produced, and you can remove the blister pack. Apply the oil again as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the suction cup used for treating pleurisy with fresh water, it has neither a shaft nor an opening and is prepared only when full of water, and it is placed on the limb completely. Here's how it looks like:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Suction cups are prepared only for limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, like lips and gums, and similar areas; and in open wounds from charcoal burns, like scabs or pus, and other similar things. The quality of the user is such that when you find a clean suction cup filled with soft water without any debris inside, take it; place it in soft fresh water until they become moldy, and have nothing else inside them; then let blood flow from the vein and remove the suction cup. Then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the suction cups again; when they are full and tense, if there is a place where you can put a suction cup or bandage, put it on because it is very effective afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, lift the dislocated joint and then apply water abundantly, doing so well, and then compress; and if it is too wet after being pressed against the body's folds, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place on top, until the flesh feels taut; and if there are multiple instances of sprain, apply crushed vitriol or ointment for blisters, among similar things, until they feel taut; or wrap with half leather patches, leaving them until they harden to the joint, now it will be secured; and if you need more padding, take additional bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 If the sprains do not heal on their own, rub fresh blood on the joint and insert a needle until the sprain lets go of it, then place them underneath; and as soon as they feel the blood, let them dry out; and when you see that they start to ooze, sprinkle some powdered aloe and sage root or ash on top, which will make them harden now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	the d.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and involve the repair and replenishment of breaks and moisture loss.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Learn from this treatise, wise scholar, that the foolish heed not these teachings; they have never been seen in any ancient books or letters read by them; and for this reason knowledge is foreign to our land, as I have found no good ones; and know nothing but through the wisdom of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have mastered their science, and by experiment, and by the habits of my life; and I have here described what is contained in this chapter, shortened at its end, clearly showing the forms of treatments applied, as done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that the preface of this book contains the essence of its words and chapters where the wise apply their understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists or sprains occur in any part, it is necessary to quickly bind the injured on both sides if not entirely severed, as with weak bones, children, or elderly; or if the time is too hot or too cold; and avoid consuming chilled meats such as poultry and horse meat, do not drink wine or consume fatty foods, and do not fill oneself excessively with blood-filling meats until there are no signs of heat from an abscess or leakage of material in the limb; then it is time for the patient to recover their normal state as they have been used to.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nourishment, or viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and beef, lamb, pork, veal, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For certain heavy nourishment represents moisture and more rapid healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that old and decrepit bones cannot be well mended or united according to their nature for the support of limbs, nor those too tender like children's bones; but pay no attention, reset with large traction rings that are strong and join the member together until it is as strong as before; and do not neglect this work entirely, and therefore one must nourish oneself with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture along a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 Each method has its own apparatus and proper instrument for restoration, as it comes to memory in that place; and the bone fracture is known by how the eye turns, and opens well on one side, and presses against the palm of the hand; and if there is no twisting or touching the spot, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no breakage; but it can have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary to move your hand at all, but apply the following remedies immediately and then gently strain now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which is in motion and are the two parts separated, they must now be put together evenly as wounds do come; and if wounds become clear, leave it untouched for no day until the wound is soothed; then set it equal to movements you can move easily and sensibly, and know that its restoration is easier than those with pieces; then strain, as it should be hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone are broken pieces, if it extends to two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or to cords, or to one cord and to your hand; then place the member according to its natural shape so that when the separated parts of the fractured limb have healed, you reset them in their places using all methods as much as you can move, and ensure through your work no injury nor pain comes to the patient; and join well the two ends of the bones by the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well in the hand if you think that it is not quite right: dress it neatly, and do not extract it too forcefully or press as those who make abscesses come forth with heat and constriction of the limb, as we have witnessed many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 When the limb is at a point, so chastise the patient well that it does not move, neither in waking nor sleeping, turning, or any other manner; and ensure the limb is secure enough that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when it feels no pain, it is not at a point, and you must place it in such a way that it feels no pain; and ensure it is placed straight, so twisting does not occur when restored; the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	; that he est la:  (e patience de se mar :
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small members such as elbows and knees and similar ones: you must wrap them in soft linen; and for larger ones like hips and legs: use a wide and strong ligament, because the wide ligaments encompass the entire large member equally so that no part is neglected; then place it around light padding three or four times depending on the size of the member, tightening near the hand with all of the ligament, then move above the break and loosen slightly at the break; and gradually soften the ligament little by little until you grasp a large portion of the healthy area, then take another ligament, and wrap neatly around again on top of the broken part; then return to below the break, and tighten moderately, not too hard or too loosely, as we have said in the first piece above; then place between the ligaments linen wraps or cloths until they are all equal, then finish with a bandage around it all, and then put well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammebr
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 If there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing ointment for the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days; then bandage with strips of linen cut from wide cloth or wood used to make notches, or palm fronds, according to this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 However, it must be that the strap placed on the break is slightly larger and wider than the others; and as long as needed for the size of the limb, whether small or large; then bandage like you did with the first fracture, then over a thread quickly, just like in the first fracture above the break; thinner it becomes, less so below; and the thread must be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen; for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen with peasants who make their line threads from flax cord, it's a great error, because the fracture cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it should not have more than one inch space between each strap.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the pins after being tightened to healthy places, then place cotton or linen rags on them so they do not slip out.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment as follows:
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to extract all shattered bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 When the limbs are large and there is no need to apply supports more than after V days or VII, depending on how quickly abscesses may occur; here is the way of ancient emplacements for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that stays against the walls of the mill, mix it with abundant egg, and make this concoction neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, which is the common method for using plasters to restore fractures in various conditions, especially women and small children, as it is not too hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of poultice for treating fractures and dislocations and twists: take aloe vera and ladana and onion and aspetide and gum arabic and myrrh, an amount of each equal to half a pound; aloes and mirre, five ounces each; alkalis VII pounds; then make powder, and add honey with olive oil. If the patient's complexion is warm, use this poultice as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster method for torsion: take honey and masticum in equal parts; myrrh and aloes, twice as much; acacia thrice; bolus Armeniac tenfold, grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to reset dislocated joints and severed bones is by using a new bandage, with cloth soaked in ease and oil that has been cooked, and place it on the location.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 These bandages do not restore, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly alleviating the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting to mend broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together to make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to bandage is for the healing of broken bones and remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take wormwood root, camomile, violet flowers, barley flour of each part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply it with wet coriander water or plain water, and do so.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way of plastering more effectively than the first, when an abscess is ready to heal on its own in member restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of valerian and flaxseeds, balm, mallow, comfrey, and sage; and grind, then mix with saltwater or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that nothing else should be applied to the broken limb for healing other than a mixture made of wax and oil, and it should not be too hard or too soft within two layers.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to the broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster for injuries and pain: take mugwort and chamomile chopped by men, or bird feathers, and yarrow leaves, and simmer them equally, then grind them up, and make a poultice with the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let the patient rest a little afterwards and ensure they feel no pain or any loosening of bone in their place; if pain comes to the area, or itching, swelling, or languor occurs, hurry up and reset, remove the plaster now; then apply a light dressing and a moist sponge from the sea, immerse the affected area until itching subsides and is relieved of pain; let the limb rest for an hour, then cover with dry cloth soaked in water or oil roseate and bind above a nut until you are sure that inflammation has cooled; and the member recovers its normal state, alleviating pain, then resume subtle resetting and some plastering, but not as strongly as before; continue gently until it is fully healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and ligation, then begin again as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 If it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not reset until after III days or IV or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what is seen, until the breaker heals, and approaches the joint above; then you must hold it more securely than before, and swell the flesh, as I have mentioned earlier; and if you see that drying occurs more than necessary, know that no nourishment can occur; therefore moisten with warm water each time you reset, and do so every day, and gently cleanse the area; thus through this method, nourishment is provided to the limb, and quickly corrects what misguided healers cause by improperly repositioning the joint: it is a bad practice, and only brings weariness and proper work.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many ways of breaks and various forms, and the causes differ; for there are breaks that result from spear percussion, causing all the bone up to the joint which is below another bone, as made by an arrow or club; and therefore this kind of break is called "arrowing.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cleaves the bone above and pierces, this manner of "absolute" fracture occurs; there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is impacted, cracked, or from striking against stone, falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is an open fracture reaching the skin just below or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that has been healed as delicate as horsehair, and it's a small tear, and therefore this kind of break is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by being pierced by an arrow or falling, or something similar, and an object enters into the bone from below, resembling how blacksmiths work above their forges; within the arrow.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this occurs in those with wet bones at the neck, as is the case of infants; and it happens in all types of fractures where small pieces are not properly set aside; and I will speak about them here.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	All know the methods of fractures through pulling apart, and examination with tests, and by the corrupt bone that lies beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when the bone is discovered, and if it is rubbed hard underneath, an open black break occurs.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, beware in case of an accident with the patient; and if you see any malicious accidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding outwards and reddening, and other similar conditions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unstable injury with hope for healing, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the inflammation comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day you should remove the bone that you can reach.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bn before the seventh day so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, and they come to the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the bone fracture reaches to the cloth covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the affected part accordingly: and remove the head from the wounded patient gently as much as possible, expose the bone in all ways you can, and apply a soothing dressing to the wound; and fill the cavity with washed gauze soaked in oil rosemary. Allow the abscesses to calm down until they are pacified, and ensure that blood flow is returning; then begin removing near the bone according to two methods of treatment: one method is where you cut at the narrowed part ahead, which causes relief.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second way is that you have various wedges of different shapes and sizes, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of forged iron; in gentle work, do not strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is dense and hard, it is necessary that you drill around it so as to provide wedges with tapered ends, not penetrating beyond the top of the bone, with a margin or circle at the tip to prevent piercing through the bone; there should be several, positioning each according to the thickness of the bone, and you must have tapers for all tests (types); these are the three ways of shaping the tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of drilling through the fractured bone is that you place one taper on the bone and turn it until you know the bone has been drilled; then move the taper a bit further, repeating this around completely, then use the incisors to cut the space between the piercings as subtly as possible, gently, following our instructions, until you reach the bone with your hand or any of the tools you have similar to tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and drawn out, it is necessary to treat the readiness that has been detained by the bone from any other instrument similar to a chisel; but it must be more delicate and finer than the other chisel; and if nothing of small bones or scales remains, gently with tools; then care for the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks refer to, which is more powerful; and this it should be done strongly, as they say.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you open part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and when you have discovered that part, place atop its head a lens-shaped incision tool so that it takes this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut too far, and the part is in two sides so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet from below, to chip away the bone gently around it, being careful of the tissue above; if it's close to the bone, remove the bone gently, because you can easily harm or injure without caution.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate all the way through to the skin, and the bone is cut mostly above it, leaving small pieces, then you must treat the inflammation, and have various subtle rasps from which you should extract scales in each place as deemed most appropriate according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are many coarse rasps followed by more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair and subtle fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be restored in one who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the scapula is uncovered, it is necessary to take a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, moisten with oil rose and place over the wound; then take another bandage folded in two or three layers, moisten with wine and oil rose and place on top of the first bandage; and do this as lightly as possible so you don't burden the scapula too much, then dress above using gauze, without pulling it off except to touch the wound only; leave in such state for a day or two until the swelling is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines like lily roots, flour of eggs, powdered incense, aristology, and similar things; and from these make a powder, put on the wired wound, and give such remedies as monk's-wort without biting properties; ensure the wound stays clean, not letting any ointment or bandage gather over it, for when bandages stick to the skin of the head, they tighten and cause great harm; because when you apply something with a stinging effect to the scapula, pain arises.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be cautious because if anything unfortunate occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if darkness does not come from using the medicine that has been applied above, which should have healing power, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil blended with woolen cloth soaked in it; apply it to the affected area. Then proceed with treatments as needed until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Say that never are the two parts above broken or separated by themselves, for they are bones; and one of them is cartilaginous, which does not break but swells or twists, then becomes sound again.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you should sew your small hole or opening near the ear, and place an equal tear inside your index finger, and in a pouch for transportation, until the sound returns to its natural shape; do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the part above the nose and it cannot be brought to its place, you should adjust it equal with a bit of a rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the tear is on both sides, do as before, and try to restore it by the first day; if not possible, after seven or at most ten days when the swelling subsides, then stitch the top of the ear with linen cloth straps, if the tear is in one place.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another part as well, if there is a fracture present; and let the tendons be thickened enough that they fill the pores with no sound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And a healer said that you must anoint the tendons with butter, and change it each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem to me that this is entirely right, but it must be anointed with a concoction of lard and egg yolk, and powdered flour; then leave the tendon until the bone hardens and the cartilage toughens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never apply goose's quills in place of tendons, and if there is a feather from the sheep around it, and keep the fracture, and blow on it to weaken the patient; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a compress or cotton cloth in rose oil, or with a little bit of diachronic (ointment).
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess does not occur, then apply a paste on the wound as soon as possible, made of mill-flour and powdered incense, mixed with lard from egg yolk; then apply light gauze dressings without tying them tightly; and if the fracture of the nose is small and it breaks into tiny pieces, extract the fragments suitable for this case, then open up the crack, and treat various serious injuries, burns, and bruises as with pastes and ointments appropriate for this; and if there are no internal wounds in the nose, then care for the wound and apply linen soaked in wine until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	For fractures of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured but there is no open wound and the break is not too severe, as if it has been broken with a stick, you can see it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	in the bl: ga (1; so f s.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, it is necessary to arrange for an expansion by two parts so that they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there are movements of the spine or twisting, then strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk; place a cerate on the fractured jaw, and cover it with a double piece of cloth; also put a large well-made peg under the cloth, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, and bind above where you can move. Instruct the patient to rest, and give him light meats for nourishment.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, relocate it after three days and then fix what has shiftwed; place a poultice on top, with much powdered meal or barley flour after you have removed the cerate; cover the poultice with light linen. If the poultice hurts, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is well again; many times it becomes well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when an abscess comes, arrange it as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of bone remains loose; delicately stabilize the fragments as best you can in this manner.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fat according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	their;
de la forcele	The strength of arms
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength of arms breaks in various ways before the shoulder, and such fractures can occur in three manners: where it is broken and dislocated on both sides, with fragments present, and is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, so that you have two attendants; one should wash the shoulder where the strength of arms is broken; and the other stretches out your neck towards the injured part. Then place the fracture against your ribs such that its shape is as it ought to be, with no appearance or protrusion left over.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	s
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back due to it coming from the front, it is necessary for the patient to lie over their sling, and place under the shoulder .i. arm splint with a middle hole, and push in the ministers' hands downward until the shoulder bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then bring the break to your hands, and if you find fragments, it is necessary that you cut through them; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join by any support, place this instrument under one of the incisions you have made, but be careful not to harm the patient.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it appears like a spoon, and is not straight at all, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the flesh; and have two heads, as you see, one being wide and the other narrow, just as in the treatment of the wound made when cutting the bones; and when you are sure about a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the cavity is small or you suspect an extremely hot abscess, cover the wound with linen and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes about, apply oil-soaked cloths, lint, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The splinting of the bone when it is pierced and cut requires that you place on the bard an emplaster of ground powder from molten lead and goat's milk, and put light gauze over it; then take a very large band about a palm wide, and lay doubled gauze with the plaster on top; then take a slender bar of three fingers wide and long, wrap it around that band so the head of the band hangs down; place the bar on the fracture, turn the band over the neck, away from both the good and bad shoulder; join each part together, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture firmly, reward it each day, and if the tendons loosen, keep them bound; have the patient lie on his back with a small pillow underneath the injured shoulder to lift it upwards; this will alleviate the pain from the break by lifting of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck as long as no harmful accident occurs until twenty days; then resume plastering if needed, keep it bound and leave it so until restored; it is fully healed in less than twenty-eight days for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Regarding a broken shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 Sometimes the shoulder breaks or widens and does not align properly; it cannot be held firmly only by touching. Align it according to the pattern of the break, and mend it in all ways you can; then put on the joint powder from finely ground ointment with plenty of wax, and light bandages; then place a double layer over it; then place a wide and delicate tablet slightly wider than the shoulder, so that there is movement under the tablet at no point on the shoulder, and tie the tablet evenly. Then tighten a large bandage firmly, so that the tablet does not move from its place, and inspect each joint every day; and whenever it softens, tighten again, and if the tablet is loose in its place, apply to the patient's ribcage; then the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when these numbers are completed, remove the splint, but be cautious because bones do not regain strength easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is felt before and not near the skin, probe further, and expose the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed boil.
de la brisure dou pis	In the breaking of the thighbone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The body is occasionally fractured within a thousand pieces, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks upon impact.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is fractured within a thousand pieces, if it falls from height, the patient feels great pain, numbness, and tingling, and at times blood is vomited, revealing exposed joints in the broken bones, and they are very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration involves the patient lying on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulder blades, pressing the shoulders, and aligning the ribs with both hands, adjusting gently to all possible positions until correct alignment is achieved; then apply splints and pads over the fracture area using fine salt or another light substance wrapped in a cloth, securing it so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its rounded shape on the back, strain gently, and release every hour as needed, re-straining if it becomes relaxed; and if detachment is necessary due to corrosion or irritation at the site, swelling, pain, or pus, do so promptly, remove the splint, cleanse the area, then carefully realign using various treatment methods; afterward, reapply the splint and strain until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	The breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs follows from thereafter and beheaded are the head to examine well and it is not this done in order:
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And healing involves setting the fracture correctly as needed.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply a cast, and use a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the broken ribs are descending into the abdomen, causing the patient great pain and pointure, as from pleurisy, because the bone lacks flesh; and it is covered with swellings, and vomits a large amount of blood, indicating serious health issues, which our predecessors have treated with great care.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it should be administerired meats that inflate the belly to push the fracture upwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not attempt this if there are no pus-filled abscesses present, unless they have already come about.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, proceed with the procedure.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that they apply cups on the site to promote healing and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the cups may attract excesses to the site due to its weakened state.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	;  the em (chief by:
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels such great pain that they cannot endure at the broken bone site, and there is doubt for the patient, then it may be necessary to split above the location of the fractured ribs, and an instrument must be used to protect the wound; then one should cut the bone, gently extract, and then sew up the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with casts until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When an abscess comes to a head, place moistened woolen cloths in oil roseate, and put them on the affected area; treat as necessary until the swelling of the abscess is reduced, ensuring it lies flat against the ribcage or where it should be, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the broken rib's bruising
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No breakage of the bone occurs in the ribcage and it does not happen that it sags; and likewise in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this occurs with anyone, and you need to know if they will be healed or not, take care that if you see their hands become softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when pricked with a pin, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Say that they have signs of impending death in various conditions; if when restrained and not moved they feel well, then know the bone's connection is intact, and the patient will be healed with proper care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 If similar things occur to the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is sane or not, take care if the joints are softened, and if there are injuries that have set in, along with sudden windiness and uncontrollable bowel movements; and when one has sojourned on its belly, it also experiences uncontrollable bowel movements.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when they are settled on their backs and they want to roll over, they cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Let it be known that it is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this injury does not occur, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply soothing oil or olive oil from young olives if there is an inflamed abscess, then place it on one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is well again.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with a cloth; remove the bone, then stitch both edges of the wound together if it is large, then dress the wound with healing salve until well, and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as "chiés de la kowe", place your left poultice in one hand and balance it equally with your right hand at full strength, then apply a comforting plaster and elevate, if needed; then bind it, and if there are any dislocated bones, do so, remove them, and treat the wound until well.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the fracture of the hipbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there's a slight reduction at the top; it causes long-lasting pain, declines toward the pelvis, brings pain to its place, and swells as though broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until touching the fracture; and identify which bone is broken and its shape; if the fracture is solely at the head, then make an equal break so that it assumes a natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it inclines towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that breakage is aligned properly.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it evenly, then place on the splint, then put under a wooden or metal stake and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and let down from above the ribs until it is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy ribcage or backside.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess occurs there, do not touch it until the abscess is eased; and then proceed with what we have mentioned before; and after that, return to restoration, and hold (the wound) as necessary, unless there has been a mishap; this is how.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a shoulder joint fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then it must be restored in one of two ways; the first being that you take a straight stick of medium girth following this shape.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And then make two loops and tie them up at the top of itch, and apply to the patient; then gently break on the stick, until healing occurs as long as heals, and have a support sticks with something lightweight or appropriate for applying the stick applies to him, and then place them evenly.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one suspends the patient over his hatter, then ties his hands to his neck, and commands two ministers so that one dyes what is above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wool all around it, and stretches each part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then strain at the breakage below and above the breakage, and extend each of the limbs to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 If the fracture is near the shoulder blade, it must be that you place a bandage under the collarbone and another on top of it below the fracture; similarly if the fracture is towards the clavicle, one must gently apply a splint without strain until the fracture is equal above and below the break, and along the clavicle; then align the fracture properly as needed, and immobilize it unless abscesses occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not strain until after six days, and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses to ease the abscess; then strain it again, and the method for straining is as follows: place the heated iron over the break, assemble the arm on top of the shoulder or near the breast, put your hand on the shoulder or chest, strain at the shoulder, and along the arm so that the arm returns to its natural shape unless anything prevents it.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you suspect that the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two spaces between each splint; so each splint is large enough to cross the fracture by three inches from either side; then strain over the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on setting broken bones, more tightly and less spaced apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 If you see the seat of abscesses and swelling when restoring the broken limb as we have said, if there is doubt about an abscess occurrheating, let it be bandaged until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days for lumps or redness at the site, ensuring no infection can reach the member because it is too strained.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If correctly executed as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such events occur, do not dislocate unless after III days or more, and let the patient lie on their back with hands placed above their stomach; and place one cushion of plain wool evenly under the shoulder, and watch each hour during the day and night to ensure that the injured limb does not move or soften the ligaments. If correct by the virtue of medicine, provide the flesh as previously mentioned by us in such a manner that the meat is at its first stage; and when it begins to regain strength, let it be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be regained within XL days in total; then, the dislocation should be corrected again and baths and ointments of medicine should be administered at the site to straighten them correctly.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is ugly and twisted, it remains to dislocate for days or months.
de la brisure du bras	Of a fractured arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of two bones called 'foscilia', one small that supports the forearm and one large that extends from below toward the little finger; sometimes only the large bone is fractured or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small fevers are broken, restoration is easy and healing; but when the great ones are broken, their treatment is bad, and more severe than when they broke together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it's only small fevers that have been broken, then a little rest is needed and one should be even-keeled.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it's the large fevers, then restraint is stronger; and extend under one bedcoat, and raise the sleeve of your hand higher than others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and have them crossed on himself exactly, and one finger before him raised higher, so that the patient does not suffer any work; then extend the ministerial arms a little towards the area above his hand or at the joints, with other hands placed alternately.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then place the mirror evenly, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break to pieces, place each in its place, and if any are dislocated that they grip their root, and you cannot restore them to their place, then make a cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the wound's breakage, I have spoken to each physician; they should take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And in the beginning of restoration, if abscesses appear, make a glue plaster from rose oil and white wax so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; apply the plaster delicately over the abscesses until they are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then apply the plaster, and insert a splint with plenty of egg whites; place the staples, making them stronger and wider than the others at the break site; know that there should be six arms or more in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; strain it more above the fracture than other parts, as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; let the bandages be soft and moist, not hard or rough; make the threads from linen, neither too thick nor thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And repair the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any accident comes to the limb, as itching that occurs on the limb, you should wash the limb with warm water until the itchiness is eased; and let the limb not be strictly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the strapping, and if the ligament is softened and the bone displaced, and similar things occur, so shall it be done.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If care must be taken as the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it slightly and let some days pass until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then dislocate up until day XX.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or else, then tie the hands to his neck, and they are evenly matched, and beware of movement and digestion, and sleep on your back; and know that this dislocation is restored in XXX days or XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to compositions and temperaments of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It happens that in the palm of the hand and in the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather a bending occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to bend over crookedly and lie directly in front of them; then put your hand under an extended table, and extend the broken bones, and align them with each other until they are properly joined; apply a plaster and use splints, if there are no abscesses, then place a cast according to the amount at the site; and wrap it in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and I ne:
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the lower part of the limb, it must be placed with a stake underneath and another above on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap it entirely around the wrist, keeping the ligament between the bones taut.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of our forearm bones, and it's a simple break, position it equally as needed; and bind with bandages, keeping the joint straight; and if you see that placing a small upright stake lifts the fracture, keep it immobile. And if the faster is in one of the other forearm bones (such as the index or another), position it equally and secure with the healthy bone behind; or bind them all together into one bandage, ensuring proper movement, then place a stake on top; and be cautious during wound healing and abscess drainage, and treat any swelling that occurs as I have described.
de la cuixe brisie	For the fractured hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration involves placing a splint above or below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their hands equally to all parts of his body; and this is when the break occurs within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then let one ligament go toward the wrist and the other ligament below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And similarly if it is near the knee, and then let the ligament be at the side of the knee, and the extension upward; then with equal pressure from its two hands, make the bone according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, without any swelling.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	When there is an abscess, let it be soothed and then return to your work and care; the ligature is made in part.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture with a doubled durable bandage in two or three layers, and leave excess for adjustment; then turn the leg until the heel approaches to the root of the thigh, and thread a long fil between the hip and the leg, below the knee; let the end of the thread rise above; then turn the leg and hip with the bandage, then place an easement at the fracture site, and put a peg on the leg bone; then weave the remaining sinew between the leg and thigh using light fabric to equalize tension; begin to tie three or four twists over the fracture; as you move closer to the fracture, apply less tension; then go back to the two heels of the thread that you put between the leg and thigh, and also to the three easements above it; and come down to the head of the filament, until you reach near the foot; if the tension does not move from its place, leave it as such, then release it when no bumps or swelling appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that the joint is dislocated, and follow what comes out of this, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, then you should be able to handle them; but if they cannot be handled, it must be split open, and pus drained. Treat it as we have described until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And at no time is the thigh broken as when it is set with nails, like in the shoulder and arm; however, in such restoration done, the patient does not feel relief.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored within a day or so, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the groove of the neck there is often a slight fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not so much a crack, but a split or piercing, and leads to any wound, feels of the wound, and this smells quite foul.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration if one puts equal what is left at its place as much as they can move; then they put in an inflorescence, and insert a round stake if needed, and strain it as required, then address all dispositions that we have mentioned elsewhere for breakages such as abscesses hot and other similar; apply to each accident what is appropriate until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones: one is called 'right' or 'mustelz,' and the other is called 'foscile'; it experiences all kinds of breaks as they occur in the arm, and thus its restoration is similar to that of the arm entirely, and its operation is also. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns at every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; and it protrudes outward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then make the extension and set it straight, and align the ligaments equally; however, you must attend to any unsightly fracture, and there may be fragments, so that the extension is minor and easier; adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of waxed wood that extend the length of the leg from groin to ankle on both sides; then wrap twice in layers, tying them together firmly, and at this tie the leg cannot bend to either right or left, thus it is well done. Anyone can administer a long bandage made of wood if necessary, placing the leg for immobilization, and properly doing so at the site of fracture with wound; daily move the leg to check for abscesses or other incidents, and treat until healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	On the breakage of bone in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot it comes to a fracture and the bones are slightly dislocated, with no injury occurring in some other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture in the bone of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it with such heavy weights on the ground as if it were to move, then now put your foot under his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, then securely wrap a small tablecloth around its abdomen below the foot for two finger breadths, and align the foot properly again, after which you have enveloped wraps all around, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones to be equal again, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the fingers broken, then repair them as we have said for the hand; then put a rod along the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider at one end, then place under the foot the table I mentioned, and straighten immediately; and if there are 2 or 3 or more, break each finger and place a rod according to its quantity, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and strain the table beneath the foot; so that they be opposite the stomach of the table.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each incident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For a fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman is broken, if she lies on her back, then incline towards the less painful side and be held by someone behind; then fill the bladder with cotton wool as large as you can, then stand up and slowly lift the lower back little by little until the cotton enters through the vagina into the nature's opening and restores the bone along with the wool; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinaturine, it reinstates itself, and thus do this for seven days or so: if properly done, the fracture will be healed. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie its neck with woolen thread, fill it completely with liquid, then blow through the hole in the bladder until all air is expelled; nature thus regains its normal state; then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until sane.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the arm's elbow is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said about the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use into my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For fractures mean various conditions for the right way of restoration: thus indeed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the broken, and that you restore, que venter est fuit la.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now so that the signs we have mentioned testify to them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed and there are no foreign bodies present, then again begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	When abscesses occur there, allow the healing until the third day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch or disturb it either on the second or fourth day, for you would bring about a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible at its location, it must be carefully set with slight pressure from your hands in small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not allow you to set it even with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight long claws and the width according to the size of the wound; thus the surgeon must grasp three or four (claws), as needed for each bone fracture case; and let them be round and a little thick so they do not bend when compressing the limb at your work site, and let it be blunt in front, and wide in the middle towards the end like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palanquin", so that the patient's chest must be placed under the visible part of the bone; and be bandaged once such that they are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fractures are subtle, and the tissues cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut off the visible part of the baboon until the tissues have opportunity.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with an appropriate instrument for this, either incising or sawing, to your ability; then extract the one remaining in the hardened bone and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned to its place, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If you do so that it is in its place, then mix the oil with a stipple of black ointment and properly apply it as such; and put nothing else on the wound or in it, unless there is an ulcer, to prevent putrefaction and corruption. Then administer dressings when you have restored the bone, leave the wound exposed, and cover the entire area according to the size of the wound, ensuring that the wound does not strain with the fracture; many times this has been done by wise men, resulting in the patient's healing or death at least once. The tightening should be softer and more gentle than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 If the wound is bad or large, and you suspect that an unfortunate event may occur as we have said, and there is pain at the site, then do not apply bandages; instead, wrap around it with durable cloths and secure them in place.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when after one or two days you see infection at the wound, take whatever you have applied and add healing salve to it, as with Tetrapharmacist's ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be set in such a way that the bow bends gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If more than one day passes and it cannot be joined but returns with pain, because there are small pieces of bone in the way, then you must carefully cleanse the wound and remove all those displaced fragments that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes at the site or another form of decay occurs, it must be treated as described in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is fractured and exposed in the limb, like the hip or shoulder, along with similar large members, do not extract it, as many times death occurs, but let it heal until it sets; perhaps after twenty to thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruises that appear around the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and the unpleasant sight is to see the deformed limb; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	So take care then if you treat us with medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, among other similar things; either one or all of these combined, mixed with stipulative wine, vinegar, or honey-water; put them in a nutshell without loosening it for days on end; then disassemble it and restart another until the inflammation is gone; or strain over a perfectly crafted piece of bone; because its property is that it draws out all the swelling from above the limbs; and if the inflammamoin has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut off the excess, then cleanse until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The member that is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored and remains after the weak and subtle members, much occurs for various reasons: one because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should; or because there were too many ligatures and could not come to nourishment of the limb; or due to excessive rubbing; or from too large movements, not in their time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	The cure is that you make the patient eat well and keep their body supple, until there are many blood vessels in them again; and administer a bath to them, giving joy and ease; then apply heat to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and often rouse with warm water until nourishment returns to the member; then let it return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted member after health is restored
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and bone broken open, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, yet not contrary to its natural function: do not believe those who say that the entire member must be replaced with new ones; many a fool has done this in our land; such procedures are blamed, and often lead to great harm, and sometimes death; however, if the dislocations and twists are fresh, it is necessary to soak them in hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked like meadowsweet leaves, roots, and poppy seeds, and similar substances; then make a mild poultice, as with well-made diaquilon, and take the musk root of valerian and mix it with linseed oil or hazelnut oil, and apply the poultice; or take fatty figs, crushed with flax seed flour, and similar medicines that alleviate tension.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 At no time is bone broken by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And so provide relief to the movement of each limb at every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And incession is gentle and apply the wound as it's treatment with antique d’estrop de tienne, ou il esmettre unc, beet les mors ne soie l’ou est sejolt a li sire; et poinz cil nulli.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint is out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When any dislocation occurs, now you must return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 If there is a delay and the lump swells, and perhaps it is set back in place with some pain; therefore, one must not move it when swollen: many times this has caused pus and other pains to arise; however, once this occurs, provide aid to the patient, then leave them alone until the abscess head has calmed down; then soak the limb in warm water and oil, then gently manipulate each member as needed when treatment comes into its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder joint dislocations up to fractures.
des mandibules	Of lower jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated outwardly, and there are two ways of dislocation for both: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a bit; or they are entirely dislocated, hang toward one side, causing saliva from the mouth such that it cannot be held in, nor can close its mouth, enveloping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is complete and finished, then one must hasten to manipulate it without suturing; in such a way that the dressing covers the patient's head, and pour mercury from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation involves two parts; while the other hand is used for balance. Instruct the patient to soften their jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The mirror is placed to make it level, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if resetting is difficult, especially if it involves the two jawbones together, soak them with warm water and oil until they can be moved gently; do not pull on the reset bone as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are returned evenly, the patient's mouth begins to feel quite soothed; then place a cloth moistened with a mixture of oil, roses, and wax on it, and gently tie it lightly with thin strips; let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, ensuring they do not move left or right or strain to turn, but rather take easy nourishment until the pains are gone, and the jawbones have been soaked and cleansed; then serve what they desire lightly, without working to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well saturated and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two lower jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal obstruction, and perhaps they vomit clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and many times the person for whom it occurs dies within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the sinew.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strong bone cannot be dislocated from within the ribs and at the end of the shinbone, and it is not dislocated even once by accident, but one feels it keenly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 The restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then firmly press the joint with your palm, and it will return; then place a splint and bandage over it, and secure it; and the shoulder which is towards the edge of the couch cannot dislocate again; if not possible, or if it does so at any time, reset the shoulder to its position as we have said; then apply a splint and bandage, secure it, and provide comfort to the patient until they are well; in the same manner, return the collarbone back into place when displaced from its location.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three main ways: one because it comes out from the elbow side downwards; and the second occurs at the ball of the bone; and sometimes it can come out above, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor into the nerves; and often it dislocates towards the bottom near the elbow, especially in those with little strength, as it quickly comes loose; to those with sufficient strength, it slips away slightly, and goes back easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally some men may experience blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with intense heat, believing it to be dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore to try it out until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known of dislocations when it moves towards the joint, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity manifest; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and underne.on the head of the shoulder as if they were two eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its place, nor move in any way; and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly upon examination; and this type of dislocation is not only to be reset when new or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And this way is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upwards and then place his thumb under the elbow, lifting the joint forcefully towards the upper part of its location. The minister will then release the hand and extend it upwards as they position their thumb below; it shall come about promptly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said after several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and softened and soothed with a preparation of althaea root and fenugreek and flaxseeds boiled in water, and treated; then let them rest on their back, and put under the shoulder a strip of linen equal neither too soft nor too hard, then place the toe of the foot against the bandage, and gently lift the top of the shoulder, and massage the hand to the sick person. Another remedy involves dyeing the head of the shoulder so that it does not move downwards; the shoulder returns at once, and you should see if the limb moves according to this method: and ensure there is a man present who is taller than the patient; he stands facing the side, puts his shoulder under the affected one, lifts the shoulder upward, so that the sick person hangs in an arc. Another remedy involves massaging the hand towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, reinforce with them something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And the resetting is done in another manner: and it is that one inserts a long stick into the ground so that the head of the shoulder returns as if on a pivot, and neither too large nor too small; then place it under the patient, with cloths spread over them, and let the arm be extended straight away from there; then the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not return despite all these things we have said, do this cure: take a stick two arms long and four palms wide, which has a head that can pivot in front of the patient's thigh, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then cover the head of the fust with cloth so it does not chafe the patient's skin, then place the fust beneath the shoulder of the injured side; extend both arms above the length of the fust, tie the shoulder to the fust, and bring the arm over the top of the hand, then position the arm under a wide strap on an ointment bench, with palms facing downward, leaving the body hanging from the other side: the joint will be held in place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a woolen thread beneath the shoulder, then apply an ointment cloth of powder from grinding, with incense and myrrh oil on all around the shoulder, then quickly strain undernehemenent, and turn the linen over the ointment, wrapping it around its collar, and let the hands hang in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary for him to rest as long as the limb is comforted, because it will heal sooner; then have him rest more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the dislocation is severe due to the moisture that has occurred or another reason, it must be tended with three small fire cauteries as mentioned in the treatise of fire cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it is still dislocated after 6 days, and the joint cannot hold or lift either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder may be cut or stretched out or softened; and realize that the joint will never fit back into its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the groin and legs, or behind, is made by impact, stretching of hands, and another instrument is used; and treated until it is set right.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes weakness in the limb and delays in movement, causing the patient great pain many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is believed that the joint of the elbow has been dislocated by pricking, and it returns to its place; if it has become completely dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, then the dislocation cannot be repaired because one can clearly see it and feel it; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the maligned limb with its proper alignment, if it can be seen clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the dislocation is raised, and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset them as soon as an abscess appears because if the abscess comes about, then its retraction would be painful; and sometimes they cannot be reset entirely at all, especially when they are behind; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	When restoration is such that it can be returned to its place, extend its hand between your two hands; and spread its arms wide, and the fingers as in the custom of turning it around, downward and upward, rejoin the joint with all its pieces, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back after doubling its hand with its own hand and fixing the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not return to its place, perform strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, then tie both ends with a wide and long piece of cloth; after wrapping the bandage around where the joint has healed in their hands, grease any oil to soften the joint, then reset the joint properly until it is restored; when it reaches its place, apply dry plaster with egg whites, strain firmly, and bend the arm toward the maligned side, leaving the bandage for several days before removing.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligaments and let them be loose; and if you see that the joint does not grip well, restart with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is securely placed; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 If after resetting the joint it feels unstable and moves, then bathe and rub well, applying pressure until relieved; or place a slice of fatty sheep's wool on the joint, leave for a day and night, then bandage, and let them take a bath; when they sweat, promptly rub the joint, then replace the wool slice, followed by another bath; do this twice or three times until healed; if you see it again, place moist malted hay warmed with butter on it, and compress.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is easy, more so than other joints. It must be brought back to its place promptly, in the same hour it is dislocated, as well as if the limb is swollen or an abscess appears hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 The resets are that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend the fingers and align them so their palm is placed over the joint area, pressing until it returns fully; then check if it is well in place; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table at full extension and for resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a tabletop and mirror position your hand over that joint appearance.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, this is good; if not, strain with soothing plasters and leave until the pain reoccurs.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If it cannot be tolerated, and you can't reset it after several days, as the joint becomes twisted; and he is unable to grip anything at all: then understand that the nerve or artery has been severed, and there is no other remedy but to cauterize near the wound, which may not be of any use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are placed correctly, place them on the plaque we have mentioned, then grasp it and leave for 5 days, then release and keep like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no loosening, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Never are the two of the hand dislocated on either side, never at the back of the palm or belly; then they are displaced, and cause the dislocation in your joints until it returns, then support the head of the joint, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed; leave it for two days, then make it equal on that day; and do not loosen it as we have said, and the daily displacement, and move the joint, and join again at night; perform this often, until it becomes tight, and do likewise if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is sound; do likewise when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double dislocation of the spine or backbone.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several occurring, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 The signs are such that the ejections occur without volition, it cannot be held, and many times limbs are softened or the hips or one of the two arms or one; often the vertebrae shift by four parts; when it shifts to the rear, it is called "gilbosis": the cure is that you must address if gibosis has occurred from childhood: there is no remedy nor healing for it in its entirety.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which arises from falling or percussions or similar things, according to ancient healing methods by great words, they do not have much benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention and created extracts in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the disease which occurs on the penis and thighs, there is no remedy or health; and likewise, those that occur directly on the sides, they cannot be cured unless it's precisely what comes to the back, as I have said; and that the patient should lie with his face evenly aligned, and apply strain without lifting up. Then place a hot stone at the head neatly in earth, another at the feet, tie a bandage around the diseased parts of the body, another at the calves, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers know the bandages, one above the chest and one below the waist among the hot stones. They should be securely fastened as we have said, with physicians placing their hands on his spine evenly until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return with this treatment, take a stick three arm lengths long, and chevive from the forehead, and let the patient lie on their side, then place the head of the stick under the forehead, then put the middle of the stick over the spine; place the pins at both ends of the stick, press firmly until it returns to its place; if you do this, it turns like a wheel that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And that you insert two stakes on one side of the patient's head and arm, and between them, leave an inch apart above and below; each stake has a hole to turn it properly, and they are firmly fixed so they do not move; between each pair, there is a turning stake where the ligaments attach, with two small stakes of one inch apart for turning the wedge; then tie the ligaments among the bones at the wedge head, and the other ligament to the bones on the other end, so that all assistants turn their wedges along the entire ligament as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 When they are equalized, place an absorbent with plenty of heat over it, then the plasters, then the cast from a piece of wood III cubits long to support the hollowness and the part of the healthy spine, then bind it with bandages as we have said, and use subtle easing for the patient until they are well; and if any issue arises at the end of healing, administer medicines that soften and soothe, using the cast as mentioned beforehand; never once apply a piece of lead to it, nor does an appearance come in the rear spine part of the back, thinking it is dislocation; these are bones cracking, therefore there should be no presumption: perhaps this would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Des dislocations du genou
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	That the joints of the thigh and the shoulder do not come loose except by dislocations alone, nor as other joints; and the thigh's joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, and front and back; and more internally than externally, less so at the front and rear.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the recognition of his dislocation beneath the skin is such that when you join the injured leg with the sound one, it is longer and opens more painful joints on the sick than the healthy, and cannot double its knee by fire; and the thigh which is swollen with abscess heat because the hip bone approaches.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	The sign of it occurring to one is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of it occurring to one is that they extend their leg according to completion; however, do not double-fold the knee causing pain, and if you want them to walk, they cannot before, and holds in their urine, and swells the ankle, and when they go, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of it occurring to one is that they can spread their knee should be loosed from above and weakens, and is the other leg, and are the shoe.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resets of this type of dislocation are such that you should check if the dislocation is recent and it remains according to its nature, there is no remedy for it; and it does not require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, push it outwards and upwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will reappear on its own without needing further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must provide strong treatment and bind the leg tightly with two bands or ropes under the knee; another method involves stretching hands over it so that they are placed below its thighs, then grip firmly a slender band on the hip; others pull at the head by the band. And extend all up and down once, until the sick is lifted from the ground once and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases; and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, then attend to its appearance when the dislocation is of the dental, it must be that you bind the patient above their ribs, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the part that is below the ankle, then extend the bandage towards the ankle, and along the shin; then summon other attendants to help with their arms, and embrace the large dislocated thigh of the patient, and stretch it out properly: it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot press it in this way that we have told you, then bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage above the ankles and on the knees, and let the dislocated leg be extended by two inches more than the other; then hang them from the head of a pole, and suspended from the ground with long arms; then command one minister that he embraces the top of the thigh, and have others hanging with the patient who firmly grasp the thigh, because the joint returns immediately.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 When the dislocation is located behind, position the patient as described for those with gilbosities, and properly draw near to the affected leg and foot likewise; then apply two tisons, one on top of the head and another at the feet; insert a small tison between the buttocks towards the deformed area in the patient, keeping it steady with moistened rags around so as not to shake them, then extend each minister towards him, and let the mirror place itself evenly opposite his hand holding the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, then place on a board and press as we have said for the gilbosity, positioning the patient's bad side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is present, it should be extended quickly, and according to what I have said; place the minister's hand on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is at the back, it should not be extended forward or raised from the ground, but rather as if one were to lie down with the affected limb displaced in that manner; and place it on its face, extend the limb as previously mentioned, and apply pressure over the joint against a table; then when the patient extends their legs, they will be equal. Then join the thighs together, and place the heating plate, and wrap with a bandage so that the limb does not move; and rest for three or four days before loosening, then place the heating plate on it; and if you see them to be equal again, as before, leave the bandage on for three days; then loosen it, and allow movement slowly until the limb is restored.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: internally and downwardly, and backwards; it does not dislocate forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated; restoration for all is that you make the patient sit upright, extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put your foot under yours; then take hold of his heel with your hands, squeeze between your fingers, then bend both sides of the heel gently; other assistants extend his foot until the knee returns to its original position, and the sign is that it reaches its thigh easily; apply a plaster, and raise the leg towards the thigh, tie them together firmly for three or four days, then release; and do not make the patient move at all, as long as the limb is supported.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not severely damaged, it must be carefully and strongly treated, as we have said in the treatment of the arm, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	For ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is never completely healed or fully dislocated, but both within and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the sign is that the ankle is fallen, and try before reaching to the part where it has dislocated: the repositioning must be gentle, and should extend gently with hands when touched softly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, one must make the patient sit upright straight, with assistance through the leg above the ankle; then grasp the foot yourself in your right hand, and then transfer to the left two times, then lift upwards gently, and position the foot well upward; perform this twice as we have instructed, both pulling and guiding the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, restart the procedure because it will return; and if it cannot be returned in such a manner, make the patient lie on their back on earth with a firm rope between their thighs so they do not move, wrap them warmly around, then grasp the thigh, and other assistants extend the foot to his hands or belt that he wears at the neck of the foot; then equally extend all helpers, and the ropes remain between the patient's thighs to hold still when extending. Afterwards, place the splints symmetrically as for the dislocation with your hands, another assistant lifts the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return promptly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 When it reaches the point, apply the plaster and stop up below, firmly bandage the foot to the leg, and watch for nerves behind the ankle so that the ties are not too tight; then let it be II or III days, and if the bindings loosen, re-bandage the strain; then release on the fourth day or quarter day, and prevent the patient from walking for IV days; and if they go beyond this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to this place, it is necessary that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	From the dislocation of both shoulders
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, they should be extended with ease, which is a simple thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any joint of the back or leg, you must make the patient sit with their foot on a flat surface such as a table, and place your foot under these joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns; when they are even again and there is nothing amiss, put two fingers beneath the sole of the foot for II hours, then bandage firmly, let it be III days, then release; then have them rest until well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and you see it needs to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for long, and if you are not merciful and compassnsss and slow; do not be rash. Begin with soothing remedies for abscesses hot, and let the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of health; and when you see hope, put the limb back in place immediately, as soon as the abscess swells. And once the limb is in place, apply soothing remedies to the abscess, treat the wound as needed with dried ointments; and if there is a dislocation and fracture, and small bones are displaced and joints, do what we have said for simple illnesses; and beware of going down the path of fear according to what I have said, because it will bring punishment from your Creator and due to your weaponry and body.
Amen	 In the work of this chapter
