O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 "Oh my dear friends," I have completed this book which is the beginning of the assembly of medical knowledge and its application in practice, having concluded its exposition with its descriptions.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has occurred to me that I should complete this treatise which is part of the same field as surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And since the field of hands is so closely related to our region and is extremely important in all aspects, if one is not knowledgeable about it, then they may miss out on many details from books written by earlier scientists who described how the hand functions.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And because of this, there has been an error and negligence in the field, with all the neglects and omissions from the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 Or seems to me that I should assemble the completion of this treatise along with the exposition and declaration stages; and come up with the forms of cautery, and other means of medicine along with the addition of its declaration and preparations as well, so as to be completed in a timely manner.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for the reason why none of our masters has found any remedies in this field is that the arts of medicine have been elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 It is advisable for those who embark on the study of anatomy as Galien says, so that they should also learn the joints and their connections, separations, and movements, and rest positions, and the nature of bones, nerves, and brains, and the number of bones, the dimensions and motions of veins and rests.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	 And for this reason, Ypocrates says that the hand is most important, and to an extent also in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 In the introduction of this book, we say that he who is not acquainted with things to be said should refrain from error and neglect what has been written; let him want many times more experience in these matters if he abandons his science and studies experiments
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 "And when one strikes a blow on the scalp or side of the head and causes injury to an artery beneath it, then so much blood loss is such that the woman dies between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 "And another blow may cause a deep wound to the ear, which is large, and if it takes with it part of an artery, then death occurs within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 "And I also mentioned before that the treatment of this injury involves treating both the size and location of the wound, so if one knows how to do it correctly they can live.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 "Another injury is the breaking of our bones in the leg because of cold and frostbite, with pain that sears through to the bone itself and causes no healing at all even if it is dressed properly; and it commands one not to dare again or face further damage, as the limb will be left without life. And he commands those who so suffer death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 I am calling you to come here, hurry up and loosen my arm. And when you have loosened it as much as possible without causing any pain or distress.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 But every time there was corruption in a member it had already been cured or the limb could not be saved and the corruption continued until all of them were lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And further more, if a vein is opened up to remove an abscess or extract arrows, and then inflammation occurs in the area around the wound.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 Because a chancre, when it is filled with melancholy humor, does not want to be touched unless there has been an incision made in order that what is corrupted may be cured.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And for this reason, skilled physicians know that the blood vessels are divided into two parts - arteries and veins; I will show in each of these chapters where there is danger or fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 "For as long as you remain cautious and keep your weapons at the ready, if you take up arms in earnestness but use them gently and firmly, and make use of any means that come from God to achieve salvation; let all diseases be laid aside with the grace of God, lest you doubt or falter on this path leading to glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Amongst its many illnesses, it says 'Do not take ill any illness; do not be afraid of a single ailment.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have consulted this treatise according to the third chapter.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 "The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is the chapter of remedies for wounds, and also contains things necessary in practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 The second chapter is to tie and bind wounds, extract arrows, treat wounds, and similar things; it also organizes the forms of the vessels.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and fractures, and similar things; it also organizes the main parts or vessels of this work.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 I remember your advice that you should provide both quality and quantity to help others understand what you're saying clearly.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I say that quality and quantity are important for helping others understand what you're saying clearly; longer words with more subtlety and secret knowledge may help in this way; and through speaking longer, they can agree on it as well; but too much talking makes them short of breath because the length is long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 I say that anyone seeking help should have both warm and cold water to wash their bodies; in other words, you need hot water for cleaning the body and also use cold water.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 In heated and dry air everything was said matter-of-factly, saying that fire cautery is great help; while the other replied contrary, stating that fire cautery only brings disease from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 When fire is hot and there must not be a cure for the hot disease by heat or dryness; but those who say otherwise claim that fire cautery greatly helps to heal diseases of the body caused from outside sources.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you apply fire to someone's face and their moisture on the skin, it makes them feel cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I have heard this before.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 But I've never seen such an instance through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 And in all other cases, only those who have seen such instances and are familiar with the application of cautery treatments, and a variety of skin conditions that occur due to causes like coldness or moisture; for others there is fear, even when it comes to frozen and wet conditions.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 "And they arranged themselves and aligned with the fire.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And remember that the fire cure is very effective when applied correctly to wounds, and even more so in cases of severe burns.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 The wound treatment is simple, only affecting the member that was injured, and not another member separately.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The burning medicines come from another member when applied, and bring about diseases of great pain and healing; and by chance it is very effective in its way that if there are not enough resources, then the medicine cannot function at all, causing harm instead.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	 I have gained this through experience and long service in the art of medicine, as well as thorough study that I have put into practice; therefore, excuse me for the length of my speech, because it is not pleasing to me that you do not hear what was hidden or fire, and the quality of the flesh, how it brings about diseases of the heart, if according to the philosopher's saying in demonstrating; but receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, dear friends, that you must make the cauterizations
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And I say that cauterization is necessary in all cases, because those who come under the care of a cautery; and moreover, only cauterization can provide relief from pains and injuries as long as they are not severe enough to cause damage to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 Do not think that there is no remedy for a disease that has been cured by cautery; and he says otherwise; but it is not as good as what doctors do, because cauterization does not cure the complexion or dry up the humors which are the cause of pain, and wounds may heal more quickly with medicine than with cauterization.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	 And the thing is that the disease will never come back to the complexion of the patient and his body, and all excesses are removed through the acquisition of foods and similar things, as long as cauterization does not cause pain or wounds, but it has its limits.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 "And when we administer our methods of treatment for any ailment and they do not work, then the value of cautery is false, because our intentions are false, and if we apply our method to cauterize, it's also false.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 "Even though we know that cautery is part of medical treatment, according to the intentions of these people, they don't value it.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 "They said that cautery with good gold is more effective than using poor quality ones and suggested that the purity of gold and its high content are important qualities for it. They also mentioned that the bad ones cause no harm but do nothing at all; they tested this by themselves, proving that it works in any situation.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And whenever you stir the instrument of gold, you will not know when it is heated by its color, and so they will cool off quickly; and if it gets too hot, then fire occurs; and every time an excess of restraint happens.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And because we use our cautery instruments in our work
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 Or you have ordered this chapter of the physicians, for its purpose to be lighter on finding.
dou cautere olivaire	 olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 The olive oil cautery is used in hot and cold water, and it causes diseases called "soda", which are also associated with excessive humors that rise from the head, ears, and other parts of the body; they cause multiple symptoms like pain in the limbs, ears, face, throat, and other parts.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be shaved with a soluble ointment making it itch for three or four days, according to how strong and bitter the ointment and its use are against pain; then repeat the application to the sore place
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 Then hold it between your hands and put both on the same side of his nose between two eyes; if blood flows from there then quench the fire that is called "olive.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place it on the back of the hand, and gently stretch and strain your hand piece by piece until you see a little flesh torn away as I said; after that, take one more cotton ball and put it onto it and let it dry for three days; then carefully remove any remaining scabs.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	 "And when the wound becomes more severe, it causes further swelling; for that reason we use this treatment.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 "And none of these said that one should apply the fire cautery so strongly that part of the bone is broken, and then reset what was severed from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 "The other said that one should apply the fire cautery less strongly, and forcefully remove what was severed from the bone as much as possible so that the humors can be expelled; and it is necessary to let the wound heal long enough; after which you must treat it and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 "Neither of these methods seem to be entirely effective, except in certain cases where there is reason for fear; and I think it best to let the healing take its course as nature intended, just like our other members do, so that when a joint is weak by nature, and the first sign of cautery is most severe, and painful at times, then this remedy works well, and in those cases I use it.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 "The head of the shoulder dislocates due to moisture
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 "When the joint comes out of place and causes chronic pain that cannot be resolved with simple treatments like poultice or poultices soaked in honey, but only with fire cautery
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 "A dislocated shoulder that is extremely painful and not easily cooled by applying poultice or poultices soaked in honey
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 "After fire cautery to the joint where it is in the arm, if you do not hold your breath when applying it; there will be even more pain than with other cauteries, and I would talk about that later. It is important to use cauteries on different parts of the body
dou cautere dou chief	 For the fire cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 When part of the body is in great pain, and extends to the illness itself, then the dislocation occurs due to medicines other than those mentioned previously, and all the other treatments I have mentioned are not beneficial; unless they perform cauterization according to this manner, it means healing through medicine and care.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 The cautery of medicine works by pricking the abscess and applying a compress to reduce pain until the dislocation occurs. When the dislocation has been resolved, treat with ointments for healing or leave the wound open for 2-3 days depending on how much damage was done, then treat the wound more effectively.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 After the incision is complete and it has healed completely, if you find that certain burning medicines I have written about are not beneficial for treating burning medicines, then treat with other treatments mentioned previously.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery shall be applied as described here
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Apply the cautery with care, according to these instructions.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And you are to call "close" when the cautery has been applied in a shape like that of an arrow or when it touches one corner gently but firmly until the blood flows normally and stops; lightly hold your hand so as not to cause injury, unless the patient bleeds excessively, then continue applying pressure.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 After applying the cotton on his arm, you are to move it towards your chest for three times; then apply moistened cotton and hold tight until bleeding stops; if there is a wound near the cautery site, do not use another cautery unless necessary.
de emigraine	 evacuation
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 When you cure an evacuation when we have previously mentioned in divisions of diseases, and do not profit or benefit from it, observe that the cautery is called "cultellation" as long as it is moist; and also stroke your hand once, and hold steady the artery so it does not move until it grows.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 If you find that the cautery does not help with the disease and it is painful, cauterize where we have mentioned before, and cure the wound as long as it remains intact; if you see, administer the cautery from our previous chapter on the artery, along with the one having two handles.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 from the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When the ear receives pain due to cold, and one applies remedies as described in the previous section, which is called a "pinprick," then that is how it should be done.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After puncturing all the ear lobes, or if two ears are affected, and you gently squeeze both at their base, then apply a pinprick to each of them; after treating this spot until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 from the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 Torture should be cured by a cautery, which is different from those that move with blood, as described in the section on diseases; and do not perform cauteries like those of fire and poison.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 When performing this form of torture with water dripping and sputtering in the ear canal and throat, if it is not sufficient to cauterize the third artery at its root, a first one on the lobe near the ear, another above the temple close to the base of the skull; a third behind both ears. The cautery should be applied to the part that has been opened with incision as well, and the cautery should also be applied in place where an arrow hit causing damage at the same location as the wound on the lobe or temple
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it is the similarity of cautery as we have just described, but there's a slight difference: the tool should be slightly larger
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 For an aneurysm when you cure as we have said before and it does not improve, then perform the following cautery: two on each of the main arteries in the head, one over the eye, one behind where they are called 'vessels'; also apply a cautery to the mouth below the stomach; cure just like we have described before.
de litargie	 of arthritis
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 The disease is beneficial to give the patient a large amount of pills, after which they should apply fire-cautery to the abscess and treat it with compresses that are written or treated by physicians; this is how cautery works if you do as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If sane, go on with the fire-cautery as usual and apply it to the abscess in descending order starting from the head downwards, or if not then use one larger cautery instead of three small ones; and do this like others, that is to say repeatedly until you become exhausted, and stop when the pain becomes unbearable.
de la froidor dou chief	 Of cold water
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 It is advisable to wash the head thoroughly as we have mentioned before; after applying fire-cautery to the abscess and to all the other parts of the body starting from the forehead downwards, if you find yourself exhausted and unable to continue then stop.
de l’epilempsie	 eyebrows
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The eyebrows should not be shaved unless they are inflamed, and it is recommended to first examine the brain as well as other treatments we have mentioned in this chapter when the hairs become long and stiff from shaving.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 If they cannot tolerate it and start choking on food while swallowing their saliva becomes excessive; after the third try to apply the cure as we have described previously, also with a cold compress applied to the face and ears, and if these measures do not work then you must apply the other remedy mentioned earlier, gently rubbing both elbows where specified.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If their hairs are short, you should apply the cure in a subtle manner as follows;
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 Due to melancholy or excessive moisture and thick fluids, the cure should be applied like we mentioned for paralysis;
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And due to melancholy there is a decrease in blood flow causing melancholy; and the cheeks become damp as well, when the veins are moist they cannot stay still, according to what he is experiencing at that time.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the main vein; after piercing the vein well and circle it if he allows to pierce the vein; and the veins should remain still in all directions; after setting up a lining and binding firmly with another bandage so that nothing can move around again, as long as there is no bleeding.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see the cautery burning more intensely than normal.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 The manner of cauterization moistens the brain thoroughly, and then applies a bandage soaked in grease and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	 "and of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 "When the joints are first reset in the manner I have described, after which you instruct the patient to drink soothing draughts and endure for some time the pain of all injuries, until it subsides or fades away.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 "After resetting their head and instructing them to undergo the fire cautery of both temples separately or together, whichever is most convenient for them; after which you will apply a cautery over all veins and arteries that are visible at this point, holding it steady according to the breadth of each temple. And afterwards, instruct them on how they should endure pain as well as any other discomforts until they see no more pain or injury.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 "And I will teach you how to extract the arteries and make an incision in them, as well as instruct you when it is necessary for holding onto them or not.
dou cors des larmes	 two tears from eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 When the tears of the eyes have hardened and are accustomed to their veins, or if they are from an artery that appears to be too deep; and it is seen that this cold fluid is causing the burning sensation that I mentioned at the beginning of my explanation: I cauterize his forehead, II cauterize both temples, II cauterize any hair on the ears. And if there is a need for more treatment, if the cautery does not relieve all the pain, then cauterize slightly along the hairline as well
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 two tears from eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 When you follow the medicines as we have described in our explanation, and it does not profit him immediately, after which he receives one large cautery to relieve the pain of the head, and also performs two cauteries on the ear lobe, a short distance from the cheek; be careful with the artery that you do not perforate.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is how the cautery procedure is called "chavili":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, but not to the extent that it can no longer be used for any purpose.
de coi ci est li forme:	 The way this is done
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if you perform the fire cautery on these two ears as they are; and do not allow your hand to move until the third part of the paper is burnt off according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 two hairs pointing at the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 No time has come when the hairs of the eye are converted into a powder, and they prick at the oil; and one performs fire cautery or burning cautery according to these two ways: this is knowing how to do it with fire, or with scalding hot treatment.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When the hairs are born and become long, after making the incisions straight across them so they align with the skin; then apply a fine layer of oil over the hair, and massage gently to remove any residue from the incision.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After cauterizing the area once and then a second time more gently but still firmly, ensure that the signs of good healing are observed; after removing any excess oil from the incision, gently massage the hair at its root as well to promote good health.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And after the hairs and paper have calmed down when you come to reapply the cautery as before; if the cautery has been applied properly until now, then the hairs should not prick at the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The cauterization of medicine should be instructed to the patient that they must let their hairs grow long and even; afterwards apply a bandage shaped like an eyelid; then take French soap and live chalk, grind them together well; and apply it steadily if he doesn't cool down, in order for the shape you have made so as the eyelid to be maintained.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 After doing this for a while, if you suspect that the medicine is too harsh
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 If the cauterization isn't working properly and you see that the bandage is loose like it was caused by burns or incisions, then it means the medicine has been too harsh.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If not treated properly or if the medicine has not yet been applied, as long as your wounds are open and bleeding, and you hold tight; then after cleaning it with a cloth moistened in vinegar, keep holding until the vein is healed completely.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 "You should treat it with great care so that there are no further injuries to the wounds.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 "And if the paper becomes wet after, and the hairs prick with oil, if you start the medicine on that one which is moistened properly, just as you did before; after the treatment until it is healed completely; this is the form of healing.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 "And the wounds of men are different in size and kind, depending on where they occur; so if you find yourself at an arts school, follow this course.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 The cure for fistula
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When curing a fistula as we have described in the previous section of illnesses, and your remedies do not work, then it is advisable that you apply the cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Instruct the patient to put their head between your hands in a manner that they do not move, and apply pressure with cotton soaked in either vinegar or lemon juice on it until bleeding stops. After applying the cautery: if there is still blood, continue pressing for another 15 minutes; after removing the cautery, wash the area thoroughly to prevent infection.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 After pressing the fistula to be over and above, and treating the pus and drying it off: if it is closed, pierce through with a needle until the wound bleeds again; after removing the cautery, wash the area thoroughly using oil grease to prevent infection.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 At the beginning of a cautery procedure for the arm, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, if you have another procedure coming up soon and it is similar to the cautery mentioned earlier, let them heal for three days more; after that apply a solution of corrosive medicine as much as possible on the wound while holding it steady so it does not move until it heals completely; and follow these instructions given by your doctor.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is another way of performing a fistula cautery which none of the ancients knew.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 If you encounter an abscess and then pierce through it to release pus; afterwards put on a small fine gauze to cover the area where this took place.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 Then you apply a quantity of ointment made from a mixture of oil and powder to the abscess; hold your hand firmly so that it does not move while its base remains still; and as long as the fistula is open keep applying the ointment with gauze or cloth, for when it heals well, it will heal the abscess.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And as for the fistula mentioned earlier, which is a bad thing
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, if it's necessary to administer pus remover near the fistula and pull the fistula back towards a clean place according to what is appropriate in order for this procedure to be done correctly
des crevaices en levres	 Veins cuts
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 There are twice as many veins cut off that are called "hairs," and also on the children's body parts.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you cure these veins according to what we have said in the previous section and it does not help, then apply a liberal amount of rubbing alcohol as follows:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And hold the cautery on these veins until they are dry and then treat the wound with a clean cloth after applying it as soon as possible.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 Of the abscess of the vein
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 When the abscess is in the root of a vein or in the vein itself, or in the teeth roots, after making pus and wounds occur it becomes a fistula; then cure as we have said in previous sections, and does not help: unless you apply a cautery according to its size; after applying the cauterization on the abscess, hold your hand until it stops burning at all points of it, or tear off the skin; do this once or twice, after curing what we have said in treatments, as long as it is healed; and if not, if necessary find out about the liver and open its artery according to what you will find in his treatise.
dou movement des dens	 The head of the shoulder moves out of place
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 When the veins are moistened and swell up, put a fire cautery on them gently, and then hold it firmly until the swelling stops so that the hair stands out clearly from its base; after removing your hand slightly and repeat this process, cover their mouth with a cloth to prevent them from touching anything while they heal.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this manner you can settle the veins that were moving and prevent their swelling by restraining them; also the veins will eventually stop being moistened after a while.
de la dolor des dens	 From the pain of the veins
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 When pain from veins comes due to cold or heat, and the medicines do not help, then apply a fire cautery or a burr cautery according to this method; and also for ice and burns.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 Fire cautery: The patient is instructed to allow the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they don't move until they grow
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Fire cautery assembly: After the fire cautery is applied, wait for it to cool off and then apply a numbing agent or ointment on the sore tooth; hold your hand steady while doing this as the pain may be intense at first or afterward.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is advisable to close the patient's mouth with a damp cloth immediately after applying the fire cautery, and then apply the healing agent.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And have him apply what you desire, according to his ability; it is a matter of the cure.
des scrophules	 hairs
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the veins are cold and moist, and they do not absorb nutrients through medicines, after applying heat to one part of the vein, open up the vein in another place with heat applied there; then apply a cold compress on the base as needed, every three hours; cure any sores or burns until they heal.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the arrow
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the veins are wounded by poison or otherwise, and especially when they come with a cold complexion, it is advisable to first apply curative medicines externally; after applying heat at the base of the throat, hold your breath so as not to move towards the throat, and do not worry too much for a little while.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the fire cautery to the bone of the elbow and calling it a clavicle, so that we have the shape in front as well; and treat him like this until he is healed
de la toust	 The shoulder
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 When the frostbite is severe and the patient cannot feel pain, and it has already been diagnosed as an injury, apply a fire cautery to the affected area in order to treat frostbite; additionally apply another one between both fingers, calling them 'clavicles', which are used for shaping before stitching.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see them, apply fire cautery when pricking the cautery called 'pins' that is used for shaping before stitching to treat the disease in the ears; and hold onto the 'pins' while looking at them closely.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating him according to what is in front of you, and apply fire cautery on the third finger following this shape;
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And for these burns, you must apply three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 dislocated shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 After you have shaved the arms and legs on both sides of the body, after lightly applying a lotion that is soothing to touch with your hands; and if the burn has gone through more than two layers, then it should be covered.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 And when the burn is on the side of the body and it extends to the arm, then put four bandages over the burn covering three layers of gauze, and because this type of burn has three burns in total; and the nerve endings become more sensitive after three treatments.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 "And at no time does it occur on this eighth nerve.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After applying the treatment, let the patient rest the limb and do not make them move their limbs as long as they are properly supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if the dislocation occurs from this, as mentioned earlier, hold a fire cautery over an abscessed vein or cauterize it after puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 The joint is healed and the moisture and pain are relieved.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When the stomach is cold and they have been at their complexion for a long time, they multiply the vomiting attacks on him, and he becomes accustomed to the usual treatments, but it does not help that his limbs are propped up against a wall, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After the third cautery on each of the two sides, hold a fire cautery over both clavicles so that it burns to three angles; and there should be space between one and the other as they are joined together when they will move. And hold the cauteries as long as possible, such that the figure of them is as close as possible without being burned by them, and let the figure of them follow this form as mentioned:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 "And if someone has great fear of the fire cure, they should burn it in with pain and hold it on their stomach for as long as you have seen. Then burn until all the burns are burned off.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After the treatment of the fire that we had before, as long as he is sane.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 "When the liver comes with pain and moisture and a large quantity of blood, as long as it is put into its natural complexion, it will be treated by putting them on their forehead. And if they are not strong enough to hold, so that they may stay on their head; and there should be three burns according to this form and figure and quantity under the liver, causing bleeding, let alone come out; and in particular between each burn two scars, do not press your hand entirely onto it; and only have a few pieces of them above their eyes; and if they cannot, so that they may extend their legs, and hold lightly their heads. And this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if you wish to cauterize these cauteries or cuts with a curette, be subtle and gentle in your application, ensuring that all the blood is let out completely; and know that it will not regain consciousness until boiled as the veins are too delicate to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When the abscess is opened and you inquire whether it's in the liver or on the surface: if it's within the liver, the patient will feel intense pain that may be too strong; if it's on the surface, there will be no pain felt.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this cure is intended for the eyes, if it should be applied to one of the eyes only, then hold that eye steady while removing and burning the cautery that's close to its ridge; so as to determine which eye it belongs to.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 Burn the cautery as long as it is connected to a vein or artery; after curing the abscess as soon as all wounds are treated and no one else should use this cautery except those who have mastered the art of medicine through years of study, for these diseases have not been cured by anyone.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 "It seems like it's best to let him rest.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 fire cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 The first said that one should perform multiple cauterizations on the roots of the tongue, in this manner: take a long root of aloe vera and soak it well, making sure it is both soft and as thick and long as your finger; then apply heat to it, and cauterize it between the cheek and the chin, after which you should cauterize between the fifth rib and sixth rib, while descending slightly behind. Cauterize the stomach below two spaces, and above them on the right side of the abdomen; do not press too hard with your hands when applying heat
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 No one said that anyone should use cauterization like a razor, or hold it between the lips until it reaches the bottom of the throat; and when there is pain as we mentioned in the previous passage
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this case there is fear or doubt now, where fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	 from the mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When treating the disease of the mouse in accordance with what we have mentioned before regarding various treatments, and it does not work well unless you use a third method of cautery that suits them
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 The third method of cautery is as follows: if you do three cauteries, or four if you're following the length and figure of the fur that we mentioned before; don't press your hand on all the cautery, but instead apply it to the back of the mouse; there is another method of cautery which is by shaving off the cautery that has been done for two nights, as demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; lightly touch the area where the fur comes from the front, or if a sore fur comes forth, and then apply the cautery according to its length and width; the cautery should be applied according to the breadth of the fur.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After the second nerve is inflamed until it reaches the other side, and then remove the cautery, and enter in that way you will have four.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment has been completed due to long tension, it is necessary for another doctor to be called in.
de ydropisie	 of death
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery should not be used if it's causing damage, as the method being referred to is "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When performing the treatment according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment is not working as intended, it is advisable that you perform four more cauteries: one into each ear, one into the stomach, one into the liver, one into the brain, two behind the back near the spine, and finally a place on the buttocks.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 After letting the fire healing take effect on long hairs and even ones, do not apply any more of this treatment to that area after the healing is complete; and after the healing, there will be a stitching together of all the intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 The shape of the cautery may be applied to the belly or arm as our experience dictates and it can also be applied to the back where one stands in front of a mirror.
de l’enfleure des piez	 To apply the ointment, you would apply lotion onto the skin
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the veins are inflamed in someone who is prone to them swelling and they are plain of concern, it is advisable that you cauterize between the auricle (top ear) and the mastoid (back of skull), gently holding your hand with a cautery to turn
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too much pain, if severe swelling occurs the concern will be greater and it is advisable to cauterize according to this form
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After performing the two cauteries on both legs at the tip of the cuticle; and if one cautery is larger than the other, place it in front and leave the other backwards, inside the leg; and let the cauteries grow long as before while holding them steady during treatment.
de la menoison	 from the pain
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 When the stomachache comes from cold or moisture, as long as the stomach's protective and digestive functions are weakened, due to it being the stomach itself or in the intestine; they cannot be treated by any of the usual remedies; you see a great deal of pain and suffering if there is a large cautery on the stomach, which one should put over that with the circulatory cautery; four smaller ones around the base subtly touching all the other cauteries.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see the abundant moisture and pain, make a cautery on the finger, one on each cheek, two above the stomach; for such a treatment is helpful when it has some help.
de la cure des emorroydes	 "of the cure for wounds
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 "When the abscesses are extensive and cold, moist, inflamed, or have been previously treated with incisions as described in earlier divisions, you must use a fire cautery to treat them: apply it to the spine on both sides, starting from the base of the skull and moving down; then move onto the abdomen, liver, and other parts related to the treatment. Do not leave it applied for too long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After curing the patient as much as possible.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 "of the illness known as 'thel'.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 "When you encounter 'thel', if a fire cautery is applied and doesn't seem to work immediately, then apply it continuously until the vein grows as described earlier; repeat this once or twice more depending on how much relief has been gained from previous treatments; but if you apply one that is greater than another, then its help will be greater.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the hairs cannot suffer from injury or fire, as we will explain in its own section, if a disease comes that cannot be cured by cautery
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If there is no fistula, and it is inflamed and infected with impurities and moisture, if the sores persist in spite of careful tending, and stay that you hold tight as much as possible to prevent escape.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After the cautery seems to have failed and the fistulas remain closed as before, repeat the cauterization until the affected nerves are burned and large veins become damaged.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula is in the arm or leg and you want to treat it, do not attempt this surgery unless you are sure that it won't be permanent; after curing it as much as possible, have the ulcers healed, and all the tissues are healthy long term, at which point you can remove them.
de la maladie des reins	 the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 When the pain of the fruit comes and causes great swelling, then let us apply fire to both sides at the same time as prescribed by our previous text; if there are three burns in a row, they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	 bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 When the bladder is weak and prone to infection due to moisture, if it holds urine in its holdfast, then apply fire on that side of the bladder where the hairs are cut from the fingers, right and left, or both; and you may also apply fire to the back, as necessary. And so for the clavicle according to the form as described before.
de la marris	 veins
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 When the veins are cold and moist, and they will not allow blood to pass, and their ends harden and become blocked; when they come in, if there is great pain: then let us apply three burns at once across the head, as we have prescribed for the bladder; also two burns on the back, or three burns on the clavicle.
de la hainche	 From the bone
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 When the moistened viscera enter into the bone joint and because they move it out of place, it is known that the thigh is longer than any other part when measured together with them; moreover, their departure causes convulsions if necessary, you should cauterize the vein around the thigh's bone joint as a similar circle, so that the veins are dense in the circle; and if you cauterize similarly to what was done on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the cauterization is not present, you should perform three more of the olive vein cauterizations and they shall be similar to those that have already been done on them; as for the cure, it may be continued until it is safe.
de la dolor de la hainche	 From the pain of the bone
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 When pain comes in the bone joint and it is from cold and moisture; the veins are cured as we have said in division and their cure does not matter, and the illness is ancient: if necessary, you should purge the vein of large lumps of fat or other heavy lumps alike
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After applying the fire cautery, it is important to apply bandages made of soothing materials and follow this manner twice: to know how to assemble the medicine and perform the fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 When performing the fire cautery in this manner as described, it is important to note that there are three stages or points where you can perform the fire cautery. The first stage involves puncturing the base of the vein with a triangular shaped needle, and making sure to make the incision deep and wide, ensuring that each cautery penetrates through all four layers of the skin and also reaches the olive; no cautery should be applied in any other part of the body during this phase as described.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you see that the fire cautery did not correct the dislocation of the arm; but perform this manner where circles encompass all of the arm and include all parts mentioned above as well.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 "This is how it works for dislocations; when the pain remains in the vein and cannot be relieved by pressing on the limb.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 "When the pain remains in both arms and legs, perform a second fire cure on the upper arm or leg. If there is still pain after this procedure, apply pressure with a hot iron to the location of the pain.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 "After all the above steps have been taken, make sure to keep applying pressure with a hot iron until the pain subsides, ensuring that you do not burn any nerves or major arteries.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 "I have heard from others who had a second fire cure on the arm that their leg was completely numb and they were in pain until it stopped.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly incision there may be death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 The pain is in two parts joined together; apply the cautery to one part and then the other as follows
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 They say in the cautery of the vein that this is how it must be done, first strike and then some less, or between threads and so on for a certain number of times; also make sure they are equal on both sides. And if one thread breaks while another doesn't break through, you will have to redo as many times as there were attempts.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then tie the knot tightly and let it stand over the vein's wound and then tighten around the healthy limb; make one cut with the cautery, repeat three times; and then apply a burl to draw out the poison as soon as possible after the incision has been made; do not wait for the bleeding to stop.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 "Albucasim says that we should use the fire cautery sparingly for fear of its severity, and just a little bit to alleviate it; and whenever there are boils or other sores, it is painful to apply.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 "The cauterizing instruments are so hot that if you apply them to the base of a finger, it can cause blisters on both sides and between each joint. And when used excessively or improperly, they will join together in this way.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 "After applying the abscess of the heel to the nail's root, press your hand against it; after a few minutes, warm water should be applied gently and held for an hour or two until the blisters burst with pain and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For the cauterization of fire, instruct the patient to endure it as long as possible while holding their eyelids open with a soft instrument and leaving them in three jars so that only one eye can move; and after letting this pass through, let loose the burden for the treatment of wounds when they are sane.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 "And if the pain extends to the shoulder or leg, use an instrument that burns equally well and has been used similarly on the eyelid as before; it is a matter of heat treatment, and I have prescribed for treating the correction of injuries.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 "Take chalk and charcoal equally from one another, grind them together, and put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 "And if it has a small hole to let the arrow pass through; and put one pot into another pot well mixed, and mix in the chalk and charcoal with water as much as you can hold at your hand; leave them until they dissolve completely or become too hot to handle, then take all of that and mix in the ashes and charcoal similarly on top.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 "And regarding the treatment of medicine and cautery for other parts,
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 "The treatment for neuralgia and sciatica involves applying heat to the affected area and massaging it gently; after that you may teach them how to apply another remedy.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 "Apply a warm compress gently and mix in some grease, covering the affected area on both legs or arms where the pain is felt, let it remain for three hours so that any numbness subsides.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 "Then have them enter into a hot bath until their limbs feel hot and the pain subsides.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And no one must use any fire cautery medicines after their evacuation from the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dyascorides warns that if a varicose vein is cauterized with fire, then it should be done in one single manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take a needle and the thread of gold, and place it between the fingers of both hands as they are pointed.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking a vein free of blood and setting it on fire until it is charred, let it rest among the linen as long as it is still burning hot. And repeat this process again and never cease to do so while you think that it is necessary for its treatment, and that its pain will be relieved; and this manner of cauterizing is called "cautery on vein.
de la dolor dou dos	 of the two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, whether from heat or impact or excessive cold, or by exposure to a freezing substance, then none of these pains is worth curing unless it comes after treatment with freezing material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 It is advisable to follow this procedure after the patient has tried removing fatty pills or similar things; then apply it to the back where the pain remains, until three lines are passed without any more relief, and if still no improvement occurs, another line V may be applied.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 This disease often strikes children and its symptoms are that when the first sign appears it is accompanied by pain or fear; you see in the back and in other places as well.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this thing and view it carefully, if you perform a fire cautery on the spot according to that form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If you burn only part of the skin with fire.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see that a second or third portion of the skin is burned, and there are pins between one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the skin as much as it is able according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply fire on a sensitive area where there may be nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	 Joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 When joints are painful due to swelling in the arms and legs, and when pain comes from a cold cause that cannot be cured by medicines if it is treated with fire in this manner; make burns around the joint itself, and also apply fires outside according to that form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is desired to prick at the base of the feather, make the cautery point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And when the pains grow stronger and joints become sore and this happens frequently, make the cautery on every single vein in one long application; and if you are skilled more so do it again but not hold your hand any longer than necessary to remove the soreness from each finger separately
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And when the pains go up and down, administer the cautery as we have advised in our treatise.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And when the pains are in hands or on fingertips, make points towards the second line; and if there is no pain after this, then prick at each joint separately, and hold the hair of the hand firmly to prevent any more pain or injury.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 "The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place; repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced.
de la routure dou syfac	 In French, this could mean something like: From the direction towards which you are
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When dislocations occur downwards towards the belly button and you feel them coming from the belly button itself, after placing it between your hands on its back so that it cannot move until it heals completely.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 Until he is calm and breathing steadily.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then reset the dislocated shoulder back into place carefully while holding it steady with both hands and commanding that it stay still until it heals completely. And be gentle so that the joint does not move when performing the cautery; do not force or harm it in any way; and make sure no other harm occurs to either of you, as well.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And if you prick at the base of the cautery, your wounds will cease to move.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 The fire cautery should be performed gently according to the patient's age and size, and as large people are larger, after three times cure the head of the arm until it is burned off; after curing other wounds while being sane, and holding the fingers tight so they do not move when a plague occurs. And make sure the nostrils stay open long enough that they do not close completely unless the patient moves their head to an upright position.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 After that, when the patient wants to stand up, they will be given a well-made bandage and have it changed after every 12 hours; also rest them properly so that they do not work too much or eat too little water and meat, and avoid too high a fever; and if he learns this lesson completely.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 After removing the affected area, I will tell you what to do next.
de la routure dou ventre	 From the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 The third incision should be made at the third point.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 First make an incision on the left side and run it over to where you made the first cut, then take your other hand and go around completely.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 The first cuts are more painful and severe.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 There is no pain from an ancient member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 If pain comes from any member, whether a finger or an arm, and the pain lasts long, then you should cauterize at the point called "pains", and cauterize according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and flexibility and its location of torcs and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 "If the first cautery is done properly, it's good; then proceed to another cautery as soon as possible, because it's custom that you must perform them while the hair remains even.
de meselerie	 "Medicinal leech
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The bleeding in this case is caused by either a cautery from external help or the disease of the blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 You must view the cautery and if it is a disease that has just started, and it is cured as we have said in our division, and do not doubt or fear, but you are sure that corruption will not spread throughout the wound unless they apply V cauteries on the top of the head towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; II cauteries on the second corners and I cautery at the heel; and leave as much time for the cauteries to be applied so that the roots of the hairs are burned off, and as long as the sores in them are not too far away from being removed by the vapors of the large humors. And apply the cautery on the mouse following what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 "The ulcers are scattered everywhere, and it is visibly apparent if you apply the cauteries we have mentioned or chief, and one cautery to the ear and another to the nose, six to the ear canals, a great one to the throat and another for sores, two to the elbows, two to the thighs, and one each at the joints of the hands and feet, and on the wrists; and ward off burns that may occur when applying these cauteries do not burn.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 "The more cauteries you apply, the more they help and alleviate pain; however, there is no pain felt when applying them as long as their course has not been interrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 "It is important that the cauteries be large and small depending on the size of the member and joints; as you will find in applying these threads.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After applying flour and honey, or any other remedy as long as it is healthy
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When a member swells and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not subside, then cauterize the swelling in proportion to its size and smallness of the member; and so cauterize only a little into it, after which cure the pain as much as possible.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And whenever cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, when it prevents a member from moving, and as long as swelling continues; and at all times there are no movements in the affected members or their extremities.
de albaras	 of the veins
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the disease called "albaras" is prevalent, and the remedies of medicine are of no use, cauterize with a small cautery according to its quantity as long as it bleeds, until it stops bleeding; then cure flour poultice and poultice with oil, and poultice for sores, scabs, and ulcers, one by one; and also tie together, or wrap in a bandage, and be on the left side so that it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 Cure chancre with fire therapy
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a chancre appears at the beginning and you arrest it by cautery if necessary around the chancre itself
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And everywhere they say that one must perform the cautery in this area of the chancre; and wherever it does not seem to have brought good luck as I believe you should never apply another cure, except for when it is called "circulation," as we have said before cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 The swelling that cannot be stopped.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When one has a disease called "adubeletia," and it is either swollen or causes bleeding, especially when the veins are damaged (that is to say too much) and they have pain, then you must hold them steady during cautery, after which you let go of holding them still.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 She will have an attack of coughing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see the patient cough excessively, then it may be that there is something wrong with their lungs or chest area
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And hold your breath in the midst of this illness called "hyperventilation" until it has been proven that there is nothing wrong with their lungs or chest area.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After treatment, as long as they are perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way of disease is called "corrosion," and nothing more than an erosion of the limbs because it weakens the bones in such a way that they fall apart.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a way that may cause the patient to have excessive heat, after all cauteries and treatments are done as much as possible, until every trace of corruption is removed, leaving nothing behind but what was pure, not corrupted
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 Then let it rest for three days, and apply a hot compress as often as the burns are healed; and every hour.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After treating the external wounds with fire cautery.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 If after three days the wounds do not heal, then reapply the fire cautery to the damaged area.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 But if a medical treatment cannot heal the wounds instead of fire cautery, then every application of fire cautery is more beneficial; and I have already mentioned that in another chapter, take from what you have mastered.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 The hairs which come out whole
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 This happens many times when piercing wounds are not a disease called "closure" according to our understanding, and is a big thing that causes much pain.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease shall proceed as follows
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know how to perform fire cauterization and also hot oil cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Fire cautery is to burn the tip of a needle through and through until it penetrates all the way through to the base, making sure there are no margins left; after that, hold the needle's point tightly against the target for as long as you see smoke coming from its end; finally, leave the flame on while holding the entire area with your other hand.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then treat the left arm by making it bleed until it stops bleeding.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 If the skin is converted by any means and it repeatedly happens in hands and feet, if necessary you should perform hot oil cautery; take an arrow or needle point or a pin, place it on the target and press hard until the tip penetrates all the way through to the base of the arrow. Then apply some hot oil, keep your hand tight while applying hot oil, ensuring that no part of the skin remains between the oil and the base of the arrow; then leave it for one hour.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 "Afterwards, as long as you hold tight to these things at your neck, then heal the wounds that have been caused.
li cure dou trembler	 "The treatment is supposed to stop trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 "If any trembling occurs due to cold or from four seasons of the year or otherwise, then if you do these IV fire cauteries on both sides between the fingertips; and one on each wrist, and between the stomach and liver, let the trembling stop, so that it brings about health for the cold disease.
des pustules puans	 "Due to pustules breaking out.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 "No matter how often the blisters appear on the body or break out, it is always caused by corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 "If blisters appear and it is necessary to perform a cautery on the head of the blister; one that is subtle in heat so that the point penetrates into the fire or the root of the arrowhead, long, or the cautery of the artery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And on the initial application when they become aware, according to this manner, and do not cause excessive bleeding in advance but are cured; however, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 When the arrowhead has been removed
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 Many times there are great pains from the artery that has been cut at the wound which comes forward or to the incision of the base, or in the cautery with a member, and similar things; and it is most grievous injury.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 And all the time when this has no solution if you are to put your second index on the vein wound and hold it steady as long as he does not move until it is healed; then apply fire to the cautery for longer or shorter, according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is cut into, and fix the cautery onto the vein where you are holding your second finger, and keep the cautery tight so that it doesn't come loose.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 "If you loosen your grip on the vein tightly and tighten the cauterizers if you forcefully pull at the cauterizers that are hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 "Do not cease doing this one after the other until both are extinguished; and make sure that you do not let go of any nerve who is in it; and further, if a vein is cut without closing it quickly enough as an artery becomes large, then cautery, or extraction should be used instead, or by extremely tight binding, or with medicines put on which can help to heal the wound; and either way must endure and resist steadfastly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 "Whoever will perform the treatment as a remedy for burns or other wounds of this nature should be aware that it is not advisable to use them excessively.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 "And when this occurs without any medical treatment, one must apply their two fingers to the wound as we have said, and gently stretch them until they are attached to both the wound and the vein; do not move them, but freeze them so that if they thaw or become numb, they will remain fixed. And perform the operation in a way such that it is done with cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 "And after this chapter are given treatments for weight loss
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 "In the first chapter of this work, all diseases in which cautery is required or medication is advisable are listed; and I will go into detail about each one in this chapter because it makes it easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 "And therefore, in this chapter there is more risk and fear compared to the first ones, because of that it requires stronger cautery.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 "For the treatment of this chapter, there is often bleeding when opening a vein and incising an abscess, as well as in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, similar things; where doubt and fear arise, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 "I ask you to please refrain from foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 "Because people come in various forms and methods of healing.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 "If there are people who come to the point where they cannot bear their illness any longer from the severity of it and the strength of its harm, then one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 "And to those who come to him in such a state that they say 'I am cured,' and his illness is dispelled.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 "It is not advisable that you consent to those who come in such manner but provide more great counsel than your neighbor and don't resort to foolishness too frequently, for which you are certain and what you have learned; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of wounds so as to heal.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Three cheers! Our dear brothers want to express their deep respect and admiration for you with all their might and strength.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 I have instructed this physician to provide a treatment based on the advice of other physicians regarding the cauterization procedure you described above, so that your wounds may heal more easily than they otherwise would.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 Two heads full of anger
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 This illness comes from the child suffering it frequently and when they are tightly restrained to prevent any recurrence of this reason is that no one has been able to resolve what the issue is.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And I see that this illness appears in children and often results in death, so it seems wise to take additional care when treating them.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And I saw that the child had a dislocated shoulder and its base was inflamed so much it could not be held up, and I thought there might have been too much moisture in the abscess between the arm and bone. The wounds seemed to indicate this as well and were petrified; you must strike at the base of his shoulder with great force; and stay like that until the pain is over.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, if you make incisions like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 And if the moisture is that severe to where you see blisters on both sides of one's cheekbone and when pressing down with your hand it does not return, then consider resetting in three stages as follows.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision is done, there should be no moisture left.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After dressing and treating the wounds with ointments and burn treatments, and allowing to drain the arrow wound, then cleanse it thoroughly and dry until the member is healed and healthy; and let the cautery incision be dried until the meat of the abscess is completely dry from any moisture as much as possible.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	 Another way of incision is to look at the size and shape of the abscess and its surroundings, as it should always be straight neither forward nor backward; left or right, but in any direction.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 When the artery is exposed and the wound is cleaned properly according to what you have learned, be sure not to cover it up with a bandage; and if the patient bleeds excessively from injury or evacuation of moisture, take them quickly to the hospital.
de reume	 in the meantime
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 If there is a disease called cataracts in the eyes or ears, and it is severe, and the treatment with heat does not help at all, you must perform surgery to correct the damage on the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 When performing a cautery procedure, first cover the eyes with a very thin cloth until they are red; then hold the eyelids tightly together and look at their position relative to each other, which will be after the ears have been checked for alignment. Then press down on both sides of the eyelid gently but firmly so that it moves smoothly across the eye socket, ensuring it does not cause any discomfort or injury as you go along with your finger
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 "And you saw it, you must place a small stone on its artery and press down until it reaches the vein, as described earlier.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 When the vein is closed, if someone presses continuously upwards from above they will die.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 When the artery does not open at the touch of someone pressing continuously upwards from above they will die; if it is VI cm or less then you need to put a small amount of blood there and press down until it reaches the vein, after that check for any wounds on the arrowhead, if there are any you must bind them up tightly and treat the wound while holding steady.
de emigrainne	 "to move
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When emigrating begins and occurs frequently with fever, due to tears in the eyes and ears as a result of illness; and it is treated using various methods for treating illnesses, everything that does not benefit you if arteries from the temples are cauterized, just like what we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 "The method of hair extraction from the temples is that the hairs are plucked in a manner so they grow long and even; after piercing into an artery at the temple, if it pierces well by its beating, and returns to normal soon as any others who are too cold. If it returns, the ear may lose sensitivity temporarily due to some injury.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 "And as you continue with the artery for longer, it will pierce through the skin in several places and stop at each point; if its tip gets stuck at one of these points then it will cause a tear there.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 "If not done properly, then the artery may not be sealed completely and can still bleed in any case.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 "And the patient's veins are opened with a third incision, and if he pricks his finger at the base of it, hold steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 "The fire cautery is helpful in ending the bleeding:" since then it provides greater assistance than before with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 "For the extraction of arteries it is necessary to apply a wet cotton pad and hold tightly; when you remove them if they have bled dry then stop applying any more pressure or compresses until they are no longer bleeding, so as not to cause more harm than good; and should there be frost present, if you wrap around the arm with cold water and keep it that way for a little while longer till they become cold, and hold tight so that they do not move unless necessary. If there is nothing else present, if you stop wrapping your arm in ice, then only as much pressure should remain until they cease to be icy.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 The arm(s) is/are too tense; if it/they let go of its/their heat
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And must have between the two joints a space, and then when you have opened them both up as far as they will go, hold the arm steady so that it does not move until it has healed completely.
des larmes	 of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 When the tears of the eyes are caused by wounds that are close to a major vein, and it is not possible for medicine to help, and you see the veins becoming swollen and inflamed as movement increases; so tight and moist they become like hairs on paper, stiff and dry if the paper dries up, burned with the heat of tears if there is too much moisture in them.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 The ancient ones were called "rough cure," and if you do the incision on the forehead with a rough cut, then make three incisions on both sides of the forehead evenly spaced out along its length; also remove the eyes separately from the eyelids, as they are two separate parts. Tie your hand to the continuation of the upper jaw bones, so that when you release it will not be able to continue pulling or tearing at the wound itself; and place a piece of gauze on top for use in cleaning up the wound after removing any sharp objects by using cotton swabs.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 Make an incision that goes from the temple towards the second incision; and remove any excess tissue between the two incisions all around the eye itself, then make another small incision just above it to extract the gauze pad.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 The first tool is called "cultellar," and it is very useful on one hand, but on the other hand causes pain, so that the form
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And with the help of this tool applied to the forehead area, and also to the ears, and in this way it is able to reduce swelling very quickly
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then apply a bandage soaked in cotton wool and oil to the forehead area; also to the ears; and then extract abscesses gently, and express pus through it; and put onto the wound a dressing moistened with vinegar and oil, and keep the eyelids closed as far as possible; and after that irrigate the wound with basilicon oil, and other treatments for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	 "You shall remove the eyes.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 "When there is no vein to be found at all, and the eyes are blind and helpless, and the paper burns; and hairs grow long, and causing much pain in many cases, and the wounds become infected; unless one can prevent such accidents by the use of these methods.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 "Then instruct the patient to push back his head, and then make a big cut on his forehead, and another one of larger size.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 "From the top of one temple to the other, make an incision through the bone; and tie back the eyelids so they do not move as you cleanse between them with cotton soaked in wine and oil, then dress the wound with a bandage covered in such liquid; afterwards cover it with cloth soaked in vinegar and water. And when healed, it is recommended that you massage gently to prevent any recurrence.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 In one way: Take two parts of flour and four parts water, and make a paste; the physician will use this to treat burns on the body as a whole.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 One of the four things is the removal of ears, whether grains or best (earwax), or any other type of ear secretion, whatever it may be; or when one's eardrum perforates and blood flows out, causing damage to the ear canal if not treated promptly.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 If one applies anything in the ear deeper or another way that does not go well into the ear, do not place it gently but firmly on the floor of the ear.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If the ear is inflamed and does not respond to any oil or vinegar extraction; then the physician will gently apply a compress of gauze or wool soaked in warm water inside the ear canal, and cover it with cotton afterwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 This sentence has no meaning or purpose in this context. It appears to be a placeholder text that does not contribute anything of value when translated into English.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 If the procedure is not successful, then perform another incision with a smaller gauge needle and blow air into the ear canal forcefully to equalize pressure inside and outside of it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If all of the previous attempts have failed and you are ready to proceed with an incision into the ear canal, then perform this procedure carefully: Insert your finger gently into the ear canal until it reaches the eardrum (tympanic membrane). Gently push against it while also slightly biting down on the other side. The pressure should equalize both sides of the eardrum so that you can hear better or remove any blockage caused by fluid in the ear.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 "And if he cannot extract it, administer gentle rubbing with a soft cloth.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And then make an incision in the grain that is causing irritation.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 However, do not remove the grain if you think it is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have tried gently removing several times and then extract it with tweezers, as we said before.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 When you think that removing the grain from your ear is necessary and it would be uncomfortable to do so immediately, gently clean out your ears with cotton swabs.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And after cleaning out your ears like this or otherwise, put on some earplugs if you wish.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If you do not want to use cotton swabs for that purpose, it is alright.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not, if you try several times with gentle heat and the cotton swab in one ear, while pinching another ear to apply more heat until both ears are equal; then continue with other steps as mentioned before, repeating this process repeatedly until all itching is stopped and there is no longer any itchiness.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 In the removal of the best, if it is small and similar things, cure as we have said in division; but if it is large enough to feel, then gentle pinching would be used for its extraction; this is easier than extracting from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 In the extraction of the veins near the ears, when you cure like we have said in division and treat distillations; do not touch it with your fingers or nails, if convenient look at the ear to the sun. If any veins are seen, then gently pinch them, and if they don't show up again after a few minutes, check for any other veins near that area.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And there was also another remedy mentioned earlier:
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Pinch the ear more gently according to the amount of pain from the vein, and then continue until you feel it is gone completely.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 "And if they don't obey the first order, or if an error arises in applying the cotton as I have mentioned earlier, and it doesn't come out like we have said, then you should find a distillation that the previous ones have experienced through cutting into veins, and you will find them either treating distills or distillers; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with any other instrument, so as to reach its form as you see it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 "And whether it's silver or gold, you should press the distillation to make sure that every ingredient is distilled well through this one instrument, and then strain your oil or juice through them into the ear; and when you see from your medicines in the ear canal, and clean gently at all times cotton, and press your hand very firmly as long as the oil is being distilled or very much of the ear; and keep the ears warm because otherwise the medicine will not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 "Of the loosening of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 There is no child born who has no earwax; and this matter happens as a result of an injury to the ear, or from a thorn that enters in it, then these occurrences come about never often entering into the ear if one does not hear well; and there are times when they do not come out well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Those that come about often if one does not hear well are of greater concern and in the end will cause more damage. And when you see those with their hair on fire at the sun, and look inside; if you notice the inflammation present which indicates something unusual is occurring within.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 And it is important to be careful when approaching the front and back of the ear, if you do not hear well; then the inflammation may come from a burn or a tear in the ear, if your ears are sensitive and very thin, as long as that hair remains completely covered.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 "And when the earache occurs due to cold, gently apply warmth and remove it with a warm cloth.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 "If you experience earache due to cold, gently apply a warm cloth and avoid touching the inner part of the ear.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Do not apply anything to the ear unless it is already inflamed or if you remove a warm cloth and apply another moist one made of rose oil and wax until it heals completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 "If the earache occurs and you soak a cloth with cold water and put it into the ear; or if there is another sore that needs to be treated in addition to this one, then apply other treatments for sores made from distillate.
de la char des papieres	 of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then it is desirable to take hold of the root of one of his fingers and gently stretch them, then place a small sponge on their roots, so that they may be moistened
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 After the fire cautery is performed in a subtle way and after an incision has been made, they are cauterized repeatedly with no lasting damage to their roots, and when they have been cauterized by fire, their roots become inflamed and do not come back.
de la gresle	 from the neck
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 There are many times when these things seem to go away in shape and strength, but for this reason it is called "greatness", and it is a collection of large moisture on the paper and skin; wounds occur then: first take hold of one part gently, then scrape off some of the other part lightly, then tighten the stitches, and apply the bandage.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 "If you don't hold the paper tightly enough, it will tear apart without any warning; and if it is pressed strongly against a hard surface, its edges may be torn or frayed.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 "When the hair is long and even, if you spread it out flat on a hard surface, cut its ends, hold it steady while cutting, press both sides of it firmly but gently; and when the hair has been cut, remove any loose hairs that are causing irritation.
de la graisse des eulz	 "The fat from the eyelids
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 "Exfoliation is a fat that adheres to the eyelids and causes them to be irritated, causing the person's eyes to tear during sleep; they cannot see or look at sunlight because the tears quickly dry up their faces and make their appearance appear dull.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press down on the left arm, it will cause an explosion inside
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And the procedure is to place his hand flat on the ground and then strike it forcefully with one stroke in one direction at a time, keeping it moving in a circular motion around its circumference until he feels relief from pain; while continuing to press down firmly but not too hard as this may cause further injury.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Stretch your hand flat between both of them in front of you and turn it to the right and left as quickly as possible; hold firmly but not too hard so that you don't break anything and make sure it doesn't move at all on the spot, except for the part where the pain is.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 And the dislocation does not open up at the beginning of the fracture, if it comes loose gently as we have said, then it is removed when it is loose and restrained in this way, with gentleness on its skin and evenness.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if there are such bones that pierce through the flesh and penetrate the moisture which is present
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, treat it as long as it remains so.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes at the base of the abscess, then apply a solution that soothes while keeping it in place until it becomes calm.
des poilz des papieres	 The hairs and paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 When the hairs and paper grow naturally or are even, if they cause harm to the eyes, and bring about illnesses as we know them and mollifications of the eyes and eyelids, so long as it is due to the destruction of the hair; then apply cure methods in these ways: either by fire cautery, or medicine that soothes according to which chapter a doctor has chosen, or through incision and stitching, or through cautery.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 "Make sure you hold the hair of the scalp securely with your hand, then gently pull away the paper from it; if there is any bleeding at all along the hairs as they come off, apply pressure to stop it immediately. If after pulling the paper away some hairs still remain attached to it and grow out, leave them be for now.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 "If the paper becomes excessively moist due to excessive bleeding from wounds or other injuries, then gently fold it into a cone shape and secure it with thread. This will help stop further bleeding while allowing for quick removal of any excess hair that may be growing out.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then apply a small amount of ointment, gently rubbing it on each spot where you can.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 If you cannot hold the stitches, and they are not very tight or loose, if you prick a vein with it, and the bleeding starts profusely, then cut off the thread immediately; but leave some threads to make sure everything is closed tightly as well; do this incision on both ends of the wound.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 The cure of the burn is as follows: and it should be applied with gauze that you have prepared in such a way as I have said; then make two stitches on both sides or where you hold the threads; then gently close them together at this point, ensuring they are not too tight nor loose.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If a vein is cut and the patient bleeds heavily, continue applying pressure until the bleeding stops. Once the paper is torn off, you should not stop pressing on the wound; instead, continue to press as long as possible in order for the hairs not to grow back. This will be how you perform the II procedure according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 With a very fine needle and some silk thread that is soft and delicate, join together the dislocated joints one by one, making them as long as an extended finger; then take out another thin piece of silk thread gently and tie it off at the end of the hairs; then put the gauze around the joint so that it covers completely. If there are three or more dislocated joints, continue doing this until all the hairs have been tied off to the back with the silk thread in a paper as long as possible while holding onto the hair itself tightly.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 "And if you prick the hairs and treat them as instructed with the fire cautery, so that they grow long and even; but if you prick at their base, hold steady the eyes to prevent movement until they grow.
de la porriture de l’oil	 The skin of the area being treated may become red.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 There are two ways this disease occurs either naturally or unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 It often involves pain, injury, and cauterization, among other things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 The way of treatment is that you suppress the swelling and apply bandages tightly, while remaining calm; only use remedies that are effective at restraining injuries.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 "If you do this, it will worsen the disease compared to the first; but there are other remedies, as gentle as feathers; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they grow.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 The cure's strength is to be observed so that it does not weaken in the way it was before; and when we have said what needs to happen for this disease, if it doesn't go according to the form it was in before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 of the character coming into oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease, which is also called "axacratia," and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident arises from wounds and burns and cautery and similar things; and the passage of time in this manner is that you prick an arrow with two points, pierce through the flesh and feather to its length, make it quiver as much as possible on one side, so that the feathers will come out after another blow.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the figure of a paper returns according to how it is convenient, that's good; but if not, then if he unrolls and puts them in order, and turns the paper, and splits up two folds into pieces of the paper; and make sure that all the edges of the incision are as straight as possible, so that when they are together, the figure will be like the figure of a letter without "griesche"; then sew it there, according to how many creases its surfaces have, and from this one learns the thickness of the paper, then join the two halves together, and add a threadline; then apply the cure which we have said before for the soft materials, as long as they are sane.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And the illness comes from tearing or cutting or cauterizing, if it is convenient to tear off one sheet with its hairs, and according to what is mentioned above; then you must sew between the two sides of a tent, as I said before; and you must make an incision according to the form of the illness, because there are many different forms and masters who need more devices than we have described.
dou soudement de la papiere	 indeed of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Indeed of paper
de l’ungle de l’oil	 the edge of oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 Indeed of paper
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 "Make a cut near the base of the hair and trim it close to your skin. Then take some scissors and gently separate two small sections of hair from each side, securing them with stitches. Apply an arrowhead-shaped needle and push it through both ends of the hair, pulling it out towards the scalp as you go. This will help secure the hair in place.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After the incision is made, apply a little oil to lubricate it and hold it tightly in place with gauze, allowing one corner of the bandage to overlap slightly over the other side. This will help secure the bandage.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 "And the patient must not be nervous, and he should not bite on an arrowhead, and cannot enter it many times in a cure of such a kind of medicine; and they do not occur when I told you how to apply it, if there is much oil from the wound, and take the small bandage tightly according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 "And gently remove the arrowhead and see if it still moves or presses, as saliva from the wound makes it slippery and red, so he feels it, and explodes in oil to another place; then repeat the other treatment according to this method of doing the work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "There is nothing contrary to the oil if you apply it correctly, as long as you follow closely, and treat the arrowhead first until it is healed, then repeat the treatment if necessary, according to what I have described.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 And with tears that do not cease, and the red ribbon of fire arises out of this moisture,
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 Of the flesh which has been shaved
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 And with the completion of that shaving and all char have been extinguished, if they do not stop immediately or if you want to prevent further chafing, then apply a soothing ointment made from cotton soaked in water instead
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 But always make sure to align the cure of any small flaw in its natural course; and from the way it occurs, on every occasion do so; and not let your hand be moved by any of these occasions until you are certain that all members have reached their fullness,
des voines des eulz	 veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 These veins are red and covered with oil, they tolerate the passage of time but lose their strength more quickly.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 It is the case when you first look at him he seems healthy, and there are no other diseases present; but if you find any veins that have become twisted, order them to be straightened out by using a stone as a guide, and hold on to their base while they are being straightened, so that they do not move until they reach the desired length.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And straighten them all in one go according to this method
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 "Begin gently with a very fine touch on the sore spot as you apply ointment after another, until all wounds are healed and dry; and keep it from becoming moist by holding it firmly against rough cloth or paper, then do this work in front of the sun during midday hours when possible, so that you don't rub off what is being treated with ointment. After completing this task, distill oil with green and red dye to prevent infection.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	 "If you cannot gather all of this in that time, apply oil to the affected eyes and leave them unguarded as long as they are painful and swollen. Then reapply with the same manner.
de la fistule de l’oil	 "from the pustule of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 "This pustule is called 'arissati' fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine as I have instructed, and if it is not healed immediately, hold the eye steady until it dies off completely.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And when the eyes are injured it will reveal corruption and blackness if the right eye is lost; and it is called "aspire chief" and if that eye is missing or pointing in another direction like this one,
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And when the left eye is corrupted and it turns between your two eyes, squeeze your hand tightly as you seek to remove that corruption from the right side; do this repeatedly until the corruption has subsided; otherwise, use strong astringents for healing.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And if the eye begins to bleed and it is not closed promptly, or if the eyelids are swollen, then remove the sutures as soon as possible; otherwise, use astringents for healing. If that happens a second time after washing your eyes with warm water and massaging them gently, you should apply pressure on the third eyelid from within by pushing inward toward the corner of the eye like this:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Here is the translation: "Then place it into your hand, squeeze a little oil out of it, and then put it back on gently until you feel its warmth when touching the bone, and keep applying it until the pain subsides if held firmly in place.
de l’issue de l’oil	 The phrase "l'issue de l'huile" means "the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When the eyes are opened up completely and no longer cause any trouble or pain when squeezed gently, then apply a mixture of oil from cedarwood, aloe, incense, and sandalwood, as well as tightly wrap it with cotton cloth. Then keep applying it regularly until all discomfort has subsided; if not, remove some of the lint that has been applied.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 The dislocation of the shoulder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When a dislocation occurs in the shoulder blade region, first align it so that you can see its root and then pull out another arrow from near where the previous one was extracted; hold both firmly until they are healed as much as possible. Do not touch any other part of the arm or clothing while performing this treatment.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The eyes will appear bright and red when exposed to a subtle prick that stimulates the blood flow, causing them to constrict; as long as they remain so, hold them steady.
de la bowe de l’oil	 bow of the body
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease is called "alcinati" and is only noticeable when the bow is assembled in oil, resembling an even surface, and it does not move; and its appearance if done correctly so that you see a smooth surface between your fingers as well as to the right side of II part, then hold onto the tip with both hands from II parts, and let the bow come towards the eyes until they grow. If there is no separation or bleeding occurs, it may be necessary to reset the dislocation.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If you hold the smooth surface of the bow between your fingers, then take out a subtle spatula and apply it to the corner of the eye by continuing from the conjunctiva with the eyelid and the brow; as long as the bow stands. And when it is released, if hot oil or fenugreek broth and honey are used instead, cure any other sores until they heal completely.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have had injuries in divisions and it is what you must consider when doing so; if not for health's sake
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is recommended to apply the oil cream between your hands facing upwards towards the sun and hold it tight so that the eyebrows stay in place; then spread it evenly across both brows using a cotton swab gently applied over time until it reaches the end of the eyebrows, or use an eyelash curler for more targeted application.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 "Now you must hold your breath as you see the arrow pointing towards you and the instrument before it strikes.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 "After taking the first step and securing the instrument, when it is firmly in place but not yet moving, gently turn your hand slowly back and forth; then release for a moment to regain composure.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 "Then press the button gently with your oiled hand and hold it steady; then move the other oily hand to release.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 "No, those who are from our part of the country, let us come with oil for lubrication.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 "And the patient cannot enter oil through their nose because they have very harsh eyes; if you want to use an instrument called 'albert', make sure it is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 "And when the conjunctive is only alone and not too long, but do this subtly then attach the bandage tightly to prevent it from moving while it heals on its back in bed; afterwards move the limbs gently without causing severe pain or excessive bleeding, as well as avoid moving your head left or right unnecessarily. Then remove the bandaged after 7 days.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 "When the sutures are taken out, you should remove any remaining bandage to prevent further irritation and allow for proper healing in a quiet environment.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 "And then there are some cases where
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 "And one day there came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in some places it happens often, but we have never seen anything like this in our land, nor do I know of anyone who has written about it in old books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	 "And those are the shapes of the magic powder that it causes to be taken away, and are pure:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 "The chief part of this secret subtlety is in its three corners.
de la char sor le neis	 "from the head towards the feet
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 "No scorpion stings are ever found or seen to be placed together in various ways, for it is said that the scorpion's poison makes its color change; and if there is a scorpion that has been stung, then it will have a bad color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 "In this case of pain that is unbearable and cannot be calmed, it's important to hold the afflicted limb between your hands in front of a bright light; then gently apply pressure with the fingertips at each point where there is pain, continuing until all the blisters are burst.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 "If nothing is able to be done, if you gently stretch it without stopping or tying anything, until all the blisters are burst and they are all closed tightly; then go on and repeat this treatment as often as needed.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 "Do not worry if you cannot do it immediately; gently stretch the limb while holding both ends with your hands and pressing firmly against the mouth until all the blisters are burst and they are all closed tightly, then go on to repeat this treatment as often as needed.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 "Do not harm the one who has been anointed with oil and anoint him as well with holy oils. If you are too far away or have to travel through hostile territory, then do not take this step.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 "Or if you have silver or iron, like a lamp in your hand, so that when it is dark and you need to light the way for him, then do this.
de la char sor le neis	 "For good health from youth [i.e., as long as he lives
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 "The disease 'telul' often comes in the chief of old people and becomes great as long as he is still looking; and for this reason it is important that you apply the cautery or a strong medicine at the beginning, and continue until they are completely healed. If not, if there is great harm to the eye, do not touch him with iron because it is an abscess of the eyes: when you have touched him in any way, then if many bad things come from the wound, cure the wound itself and restrain its spreading.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 The sentence "quant li neis est copez et cosus" does not have a direct translation to English
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 When one of the remedies is continued in this chapter, I take pleasure, as it is beneficial for some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If one of the remedies is continued in this chapter, I take pleasure, as it is beneficial for some people. When a wound is fresh all over its area, and when there are two cuts close together, then treat both wounds simultaneously; and ensure that the cuts are clean on one side and the other, if necessary, so you cleanse all parts of them until they heal, and sew them up tightly after cleansing with fragrant powders or incense. And put the powder onto a piece of cloth from a firebrand, which is very hot or another, let it burn for as long as it sears the sore, then treat the sore like that.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 The method of stitching is such that you put together the solution by needles if you have said so in the stitches at the abdomen or by thread if I told you so.
des apostemes des levres	 "of the eyelids
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The eye lids are held down firmly with stitches to prevent them from moving around or being torn apart, and the incision is made in a way that it can be pulled out gently but securely without causing injury to the eyelid itself; and then the skin of the eyelid is also taken care of by removing any dead skin so that everything remains intact.
de la char des gencives	 "of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 Every time the gums are burned by an ulcer, people say "albulus" (it hurts). If you hold them with stitches and secure their base to prevent it from falling out or getting infected, then treat the blister or powder that may come after; and whenever this char comes back again, if not cured once more by cauterization, consider using other remedies. And these are the forms of wounds being treated.
des sordens	 of sorrow
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 Do not fear or worry: if you keep your mouth open between the teeth and hold them steady, they will stay like that as long as the corruption lasts, until it is healed. And when you put a black tooth in one's mouth, there should be white and green too, and all other shades among those held tight; and on opening of the door or any movement whatsoever: such forms and others will show themselves to you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 When you cure the pain of a tooth it is important to take care not to remove too much flesh because otherwise there would be no excuse for doing so later on.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 "And if you prick at your base," meaning if a patient pricks their finger or arm when receiving treatment, hold them steady to prevent movement until they grow long and even.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 "Take great care to prevent the injury of all parts; and then you should gently stretch out his finger or arm.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 "After stretching the finger or arm straight towards a painful spot, if it does not move further and there is no other way to stretch gently in that area, then release your hold with care.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 "And if it is pinched and bent, then you should gently wrap with bandages to protect its location, so that it does not break when released; and make sure to stretch carefully while holding the finger or arm.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 "And you should treat them well while you refrain from pulling them out, and leave a part of the root exposed for greater pain.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 "And you should know that if the ignorant patient pulls them out too soon or breaks any part of their root while they are raw, it will cause great pain and injury.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	 "The shapes of the arteries are such that they must be made very smooth and have large openings so you can pass your finger through them easily. Here are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 "And they should be very large if the patient is unable to open them properly and should have smooth inner surfaces so you can easily hold onto them.
de la racine des dens	 of the root of thorns
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When a thorn root is torn from its place, it's best to wrap it in soft cloth or a handkerchief so that no more damage occurs.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 As long as the veins are not damaged and if there is no infection in them, it's best to treat with a warm compress so that they feel cool on contact.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots were to burst through these veins, it's best to use an instrument called "althali" which is heated and applied to know its form; as for what comes next.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 And if the root were to break inside, it's best to use a tool called "althali" which is heated and applied so that its form comes next; as for what follows.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you have the instrument "althali", here's how it works
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 "And other arms are placed before a reason for their existence, and this instrument seems to have some great strength.
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 "But some of these arms cannot break away, and it is said that the strongest ones are; and other arms, which are not mentioned; and the master ones show their subtlety through themselves by means of this instrument, according to what the wounds and illness teach us, for they have many diseases or did not find a way because of the diversity in them, so if he seeks the instruments that he needs, I told you and help him with the gestures as mentioned before.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 "And they are large and well holding so that the limb can stay in place, but it cannot grip or hold tightly; then there is another way of treating through medicines suitable for this, if he has such an instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 When the tooth appears as it were new and bright, its form is smooth, and especially in women are white. After having removed the tooth, if you take this instrument that has just been used to shape itself into an arrowhead, then hold steady; and if it is done well, there will be no need for a second attempt.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the handle very slowly and gradually in hands should be held tight so that you do not move others, and if it appears on this, then the shape of which was formed as is also used to make.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 And just as in the case of those who make arrows; and in holding the tooth very slowly and gradually tight in hand, if it does not move until it is fully formed; then at the end there should be no trace left, and its roots are too thin and it will bleed the tongue.
quant li dent lochent	 When teeth bite
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are biting
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 After tying the teeth with thread and binding them together, let them stay in place until they heal. And if any of the threads are torn off, tie another thread on instead to hold it tight; as long as you see fit, do not remove this first one while the wound is healing
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 "And when the tooth is out and they return it to its place in a smooth motion as we have described; and they do not stop until the shape of an arrow's end is restored, or until the arm fails.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 "With this ointment
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 "With this ointment you can treat wounds and sores of the mouth as well as heal ulcers from burns, or any other accident causing pain in the mouth. And when applied to an ulcer it soothes away the pain immediately; and when used on a large piece [of skin] it doesn't burn too much because of the artery that is there; and if you have done so gently apply some warm water after applying this ointment, or cold water for other situations as needed, but don't let them stay in contact with the lips. And always remember to not leave it on for too long, otherwise pain might occur.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And when the head injury occurs and it is reset, if you put it into the flame of a cautery, which is good for this; then the other treatment as long as it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the head injury occurs and it is reset, if you put in into the flame of a cautery, which is good for this; then other treatments as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	 from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 No time comes from the throat and tongues which are called "godath", and they come out properly in two parts, and when you cure them as we have said in division, and they are healthy if you pay attention: it is a painful sensation of little sense and change color if not touched by fire.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if the root is big and it's redness is severe, do not let him touch with iron; otherwise there will be wounds as soon as he separates from you or may rupture himself; and if his skin is white and the root is thin, then gently apply the instrument to probe, but first ensure that its base is firmly held in place so that it does not move.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Do not let the abscess be exposed to the sun, and make sure your hands are clean, place it in front of your mouth and press the tongue against it all over with any instrument that is smooth; so that this may happen.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 Do you press the tongue against all of this instrument, and see if it fits properly when placed in one's mouth? And try to fit it into the other; and try nothing else with that instrument. Then apply it uniformly across the surface, so that it may seem like forceps; and throughout its use, keep a firm grip on one part and let go of another, and are both sharp, made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 "Without having this tool, if you try to hold tightly, it can lead to injury.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 "If you hold onto one of the veins tightly and squeeze the other in the same way after making an incision, you will gargle with hot water immediately afterwards, and constantly gargle until relief is felt, or burns are eaten out by strong acids if they occur, similar things, as long as no other veins arise; then cure as much as it may be possible to; and never again arise any veins except the two mentioned.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 "I treated a woman with an abscess in the throat; it was to know that she had lost her voice due to this obstruction and could not breathe nor drink, and finally died.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the eyes were swollen, causing great pain and injury
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I quickly tried to fix it, first one tear and then the other turned out badly, and then they both started bleeding simultaneously; after that I tried to insert a tampon in each of their eyes, but as soon as I did so, they both began to weep uncontrollably; after that I cauterized them with a hot iron.
de l’uve	 Of the
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When rain comes to an eye, it swells and becomes long; if it is perpendicular or pointed upwards, it is called a "tear". If it is large and round, it is called a "sclera" (the white part of the eye).
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When cured as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit me, you see that the closing of the aperture is eased, and it is subtle if you cope with her; and she who is roundly assembled and is not long enough; and she has a sanguine color or is blackish if you want to make an incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 There is great danger involved in the abscess.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 It is advisable that when you see it, as I have described, to make the abscess stand in front of the sun, and press its tongue against an instrument we have mentioned here before; then slit open with a knife and treat it from inside out, and tie up any other stitches you may need.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is advisable that you do not compress the excess fluid which is outside of nature's limit; if you press on more, as pain in the voice and throat occur; after the incision use what we have said for making incisions with two fingers, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if you want to prevent pain, then apply a fire cautery to the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The method of applying the cautery is sharp and steady
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 Then place the painful part on a sharp and steady instrument that we mentioned in our cautery chapter, which is applied with a very thin flame so it's not too thick nor too clear. And while applying this instrument, make sure to do as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the medication to the affected part if necessary, by scraping it gently with a spoon; and place the instrument on top of the medication while applying it so that only its edge touches the skin; and make sure not to let the flame touch the patient's skin directly or in too much contact as this may cause burns. Then squeeze it onto the affected area, making sure you do it gently enough but firmly enough to ensure a good application of the medication without causing any pain. And if applied correctly, leave it on for about 4 hours or until the next IV dose (if applicable). If you feel dizzy after applying the medicine, breathe in some cold air and gargle with warm water as needed; do not apply more of the medication at this point unless instructed to by a doctor.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 This cure is more severe than the cautery alone. If it's done by fumigation in this manner, slowly and carefully, with vinegar and rue and chamomile and lavender and other herbs, all or none of them in one pot, and so cook until boiling; then filter out the broth well from a lot of earth, and if you have such an instrument that fits this way
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 It can be done with either gold or silver, and when the head is dislocated by a blow to the shoulder bone as it rises through the artery, until the eye is dead. After that, it should dry out, and remember not to do this at the beginning of the bleeding from the wound, for many things happen; and do not do what I have said about dislocating the joint.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 If the instrument is not present, if you take a knife and press down firmly on the base of the eye socket, if it does not hurt too much the mouth will hold still; for the bone cure ensemble well
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 Here are some ways to help the patient who vomits blood or vomit up something other than food. If you want to see if it is a stomach lining issue, press on the tongue at the sun until all of it is out; if swallowed a sponge or some other object instead, pull it through with force and swallow it whole. If it comes from what we have mentioned before, seek medical attention quickly
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 And if the object is large and might be difficult to swallow without gagging or injuring your tongue or throat, then swallow it whole immediately, ensuring that you do not touch the epiglottis with anything else as well.
de la sansue de la gorge	 of the tongue
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 There should be no pain when swallowing medicine unless you look into the mouth and press your tongue to the instrument I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see blood on it, even in tiny quantities, or fine threads that come out with them.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if you find it not worth it, if you take a strong dose and swallow it with the mouth abscess, then spit or vomit it out immediately.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 Then the abscess is gone altogether.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then drink a full glass of cold water, and swallow it with the mouth, and get rid of its taste by swallowing rapidly, and move to its hand immediately; and if you see it quickly after drinking the abscess will be gone.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if she does not sneeze when I told her to do so in the fumigation of the eyes; then let us do it many times, for she will gradually come to realize what is being done.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The manner of the fumigation itself involves using pots or pans with soot on them, and covering the eyes with a cloth in front of it, as well as putting a cloth over the nose to cover the mouth; then perform the fumigation, and have the patient put their tongue out so they can see what is being done, and close the mouth if necessary; afterwards let them drink water and spit out any phlegm or other matter that comes up.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of the instrument when treating a cold is such that if one can see it clearly in their throat, they may enter into the mouth; and its appearance resembles that of a lancet (small needle), so if what she takes has this effect on her, she cannot be calmed.
li chapistres des apostemes	 The doctors of this chapter are skilled at setting bones back into place.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 The chapter discusses the different types of cuts and incisions that doctors perform in their practice, both large and small, including those related to perforations and resections; it also emphasizes the importance of moisture in these procedures.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 The second method is performed through incisions at the top of the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 The second method differs from the first one in that it is performed on the upper part of the body and not the lower part, and also because its incisions are different than those that join together or separate things.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 If an incision is not made as planned or should be repeated when it does not take effect, the doctor must continue to perform the incision until its completion; and if there are such things that need to be pierced when they have been completed, but do not die according to their completion, just like incisions that join together.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an elbow dislocates and it is held still as soon as possible to prevent further movement of the arm and the nerve of the joint, due to this contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When the principal member dislocates and perforates through it while it is moving or at its base if it has already been injured, do not attempt to reposition it until healing is complete.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 It is advisable to have the perforation as close to the elbow member as possible and after healing it may be more dependent on that member and closer to its opening; if there are perforations at both ends of the artery, make sure the arms or fingers are not involved in the injury along with the veins and arteries.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 On these occasions when a member dislocates
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And if an abscess is opened at the time of dislocation, it should be left open to drain completely, as we have stated.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 If a vein is pierced in this way, you will cause the blood to flow, and lead to internal bleeding; and through such an occurrence, the veins become damaged and the patient becomes covered with blood.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if all the joints are pierced across the chest, then the limbs will be affected.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is important to treat all joints and wounds similarly, regardless of their size or severity; and if there are such large joints that require cutting into three angles, as well as those where the wound resembles a furrow in the ground, you should handle them identically; and if there are such wounds that require a round cut, along with other cuts and similar injuries.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 "Whoever has no shoulder joint but one superficial, it's best to remove the entire bone at once and not just part of it; if there are several joints, you must remove them all in sequence starting with the most superficial one.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 "If someone tries to dislocate it many times and fails, they may injure the joint and not be able to move them again.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When performing a dislocation of the shoulder joint, first check for any signs of an injury and see if there is minor swelling or not too much pain involved; then, depending on how severe the pain may be, you can try to push it back into place with your hand or finger, or gently apply pressure from another part of your body towards that bone.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 "And they become inflamed if not treated with immediate cold and ice, causing pain when touched.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And they become inflamed if not treated promptly with ice packs and oil to soothe the pain of touching them.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 "It is advisable for those with an abscess to seek treatment before it becomes a problem and consult the physician.
des soros	 "The sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 "Or with two main veins, and manner of us that are on trial, as the liver from a line, and many more alike.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 "If there is excessive fat or moisture when removing it, and if the skin is rough and piercing during shaving, then there should be no doubt that they will cause injury.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 "When the size of the incision is small and there are no instruments used that would be called an 'entromissoire', meaning it comes later after another.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 "If there is moisture present when inserting or removing a long instrument.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 "If moisture is present and cannot be removed, leave the area untouched until it has healed completely; then clean with a cotton soaked in Egyptian ink if necessary; otherwise simply apply the wound dressing to another part of the body; they will only happen where there is injury.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then wash the cotton as many times as necessary in front of the second wound and then treat the healing wound appropriately.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if you're holding your breath, stay that way until you have heard every word I am about to say
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 If the eye starts moving when it should not move, and holding tightly until all the treatment is done as I have said
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And if you hold too tightly on the abscess, it will be more painful; because there's a risk of infection.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if the abscess is not painfull or there's no moisture present, then it can be released gently and slowly as a last resort, and if nothing else works, just do so anyway, without causing further injury.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 And if there are abscesses that come and go from the ears or roots of the ears, it is done with great care to prevent any damage to them, as well as other treatments that may be necessary.
des scrophules	 sores
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times the abscess is found on this spot, and sores are also located here, and angles appear, there is never another place or course that they may take, they are many and intertwined with each other
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each abscess is properly located on its side, as we have described and the wounds do their share of work if they are able, just like what has been said; and the similarities between these abscesses are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 It contains moisture and some poisons that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the case where you see good disposition on your thigh, and there are similarities to veins and arteries but no connection between them; if it is suitable that you treat with a incision and excision of that part, and take out the two valves from each side if necessary, as we have said in the previous chapters; and be patient, and do not touch the nerve or vein, nor go too far forward; just do what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 "And if you bind the vein or artery and it doesn't let go when placed on a bruise, or any other wound that remains unbroken, then hold tight to the wound; and let it stay as long as the sutures are in place, and continue to compress the wound until the wound is closed.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 "And when the body is injured and it happens often to the same place, as long as you complete it; then inquire at what time if there are no small scars.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 "If there is a vein of the wound that is large, but it is only suitable to cover this wound with a strong double thread and leave it tight, so as not to move by itself; then apply a gauze soaked in Egyptian cotton, and then apply the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 "And if you cover the entire wound, then it is suitable to gather together two pieces of the cloth and apply them now, so that there will be no excess for the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 "If you want to treat the root of it [the dislocation], first try these methods as we have described.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When the wounds are well healed and if applying pressure with a thumb or finger causes no further pain, then you can start to treat them.
de squinance	 There is nothing unusual in this word; it'
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 The ancient text describes how to treat throat injuries; however I am not aware of any such practice in our modern times and that's the end of their description.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 For those who have throat injuries, it is recommended to cover the throat with a cloth that covers the epiglottis; and in no case should any help be provided by putting anything into the mouth or nose as this can cause further damage.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When a disease is in the nasal cavity due to mucus, it's important to cover your nostrils so as to prevent drowning that comes from choking
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is advisable to make a small incision between the two circles or through it in such a way that it does not go inside the cartilage; and if there are no issues with this section of the epiglottis, they will be easily accessible for examination.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is frightened and it is advisable to extend his collar all the way up to his nose, then shave him as short as he grows at the chin; and you should examine any sores, do not see anything, and then dress the throat with a bandage, just like we have said; and leave an opening for breathing.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when the hour of strangulation is suspected, gather all the fingers from the wound and hold them tightly together, then administer medicines that soothe pain as long as they are in control.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 "This is no longer effective when the throat has been cut and the patient loses consciousness.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 "However, if the tongue cannot be moved and he breathes through the wound, and it is feared that death will ensue, then commands must come to leave the wound open until the fever of illness has passed and a physician is available.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 "I found that a maiden had been strangled with a cord and placed in her throat, choking part of the airway; I appealed to them for help but they were unresponsive.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I discovered the wound and found it to be caused by an abscess, so I knew that no stitches had been used for its treatment, only a poultice was applied.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hasted the patient and treated the wound as quickly as possible until it became healthy again; but after that, she was hoarse of voice for some time to come.
de la grosse gorge	 The large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 Hernia of the throat is called "hernia of the larynx" and is one of many types - it occurs in both men and women. It can occur due to natural causes or accidents; either way, it cannot be prevented.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 The accident can occur two ways - either due to swelling of the larynx (causing difficulty swallowing) or from injury related to arteries. It is unpredictable and does not allow for any prevention; once it occurs, everything must be done as quickly as possible so that the damage cannot progress further if there are no complications; otherwise, cure should be sought immediately and the cause addressed thoroughly until it is completely healed.
des nous	 The
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 These ways are correct, which I will explain all the details; and it is important to note that there is a distinction between not doing anything and actually doing something.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 I say that the emission is harsh and dry until the breathlessness has passed, and it completes its purpose by emptying the pores; unless resting the breath and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With no breath there is no heat nor cold nor pain, and contains the essence which is its own sac and is according to nature's course, and comprehends these comparisons or smooth or moist, all colors are as I have said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is important when coming to the treatment of no breath that you first inspect and apply it with a tool called an 'entromissor', according to its shape which will come or be a chapter after this one.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 "The manner of removing the stitches from us is that you pull or push gently more than you tug at the abscess, and your two fingers slowly as it heals until the wounds are healed, then go according to the size of the abscess; after pulling out the extractor, be careful while leaving.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 "The moisture from the abscess will be reduced if it is as you have said about other abscesses, and after pulling out the extractor, then there will no longer be any moisture, so that it stops healing when it cuts across and presses on various parts of the body, until he finds a way to heal it properly with his own.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 "If there is no improvement at all and it recurs frequently, then hold the treatment until further notice from a doctor; if it makes even small progress, but still causes pain in certain parts of the body, apply healing remedies after making an incision near the abscess, and continue other treatments as much as possible.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 "And if you have a fever and it is contrary or another kind of heat that burns the body's veins, let them bleed for two or three days until the inflammation subsides; then return to work as soon as possible.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 "Here are the shapes of external hemorrhoids and their three ways: large ones called 'albaret', medium-sized ones called 'breb', and small ones called 'petit'. They come in three colors: bright red, yellow, or silver; they also differ by size, with larger ones being more difficult to treat.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 "The shapes of anal fissures are similar to hemorrhoids: large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones. If one fissure has three different types, then they all have the same characteristics. And if it only has two different types, or just one fissure by itself, then they also follow these rules.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 This is the first sentence to translate.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 and each time in that way of incision is done with great force, causing arteries and veins.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 No veins are opened when they start to be corrupted until they seem full of blood and appear to the doctor; and they die after that, as long as this procedure is done in this way according to these lines, up until .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then remove the fat and cover the wound with char until it is healed; and hold the edges together tightly as long as they are not cut through completely to prevent them from tearing apart or bursting open if too much pressure is applied; then remove what was previously said about stitching and powdering, and everything necessary for healing, as long as it remains intact; and if it's not perfectly healed or has not been fully cut through, in that case do not let the edges rest until they are completely done, otherwise there will be a risk of infection. Then remove what was previously said about stitches and powdering, and everything necessary for healing, as long as it remains intact; then apply pressure to the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive dressing material to make sure no movement occurs while the healing takes place.
des apostemes des asselles	 of the abscesses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 Of the abscesses, when they come to light, they are signs of sores that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Whenever there is moisture, it should be applied in this way, from the line .b to the line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the boil that is in the abscess becomes visible, if you apply a clean cloth and leave it on for a while until all the cotton has soaked up some of its juice, then remove the cloth completely, and cure by washing with warm water as much as possible to avoid infection.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is of a similar type as those we have described in wounds before, or the boil heals itself like we said it could happen; then apply fire cautery just like we mentioned earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	 from an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 "When the artery is obstructed and the heart begins to fail, if many times aneurysms occur, then it has a vein that is blocked off from closing properly; when you sense an injury in your chest, if there's blood flow loss; and when it happens through the vein, if not treated promptly, it can lead to other serious injuries.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "It's important to avoid the cure of fire when the aneurysm is between two arteries that are close together; and for those who have an artery blocked due to fatty deposits on the outside of the artery, then it needs to be treated promptly in order to prevent further complications such as aneurysms occurring.
des apostemes des ners	 "of the arms
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Arteries and veins will become inflamed if exposed to heat or excessive work, resulting in pain and injury.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 When the arm is dislocated due to excessive force or work that causes it pain and swelling of the arms may occur, making movement painful, and causing the arms to become discolored in areas where they have been strained; when restraint occurs with pain, preventing motion but not death, as the skin may tear.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the shoulder joint is dislocated and there are tendons near it, hold the skin at its base; if large, if the sutures are broken and you extract the arrowhead from the wound while closing the stitches to heal the wound as quickly as possible.
des grosses boces pendans	 hanging tongues
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 There is no occasion to happen inside and nowhere else the tongue hangs, and it's a disease that resembles a "fungus," with its root being subtle, and the large ones grow; and some are small and large; and there was one who had II or belly were like fungi more similar than anything else, and there was no difference, and were white, and had many roots, and were burned, and it ached from excessive moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I saw one with eighteen ounces and the other six ounces, and their veins when incised appear moist and have a light and damp root, if you look closely at them they are moist, and the color of their artery is bright and damp and has a subtle root; if the needle pricks through thinly it's in your presence hold the cauterization fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 The patient is experiencing severe pain and discomfort from a large abscess, so they must use caution when cutting into it to avoid making things worse; after opening the abscess, hold down the edges of the wound as long as possible while continuing treatment until healing takes place.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 You should treat the abscess by incision and drainage.
quant li boude ist fuer	 when blood is being evacuated from
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the abscess is inflamed or full of pus, and it is located in the abdomen or near major veins or arteries, where there may be danger to the organs themselves; then treat by incision and drainage, with caution
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And when it is due to the colon, there are many more, and if they press at their sides as soon as they retract, and then come again, and for any reason may be sore, and great pain comes through in its entrance from a lot of work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And when it is due to moisture, it's a minor thing, and as soon as you press with your hand, don't squeeze tightly; and when it is due to an abscess, if the pain from the large and hard abscesses or fissures is severe, then hold still while observing its appearance through the veins of the artery or vein.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If you should let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 And there is doubt and fear as I have mentioned before about an abscess in the artery or vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 Here is the translation: "For a dislocation of the shoulder due to moisture, you should command the patient to straighten their arm so that it aligns with its opposite side and stay in place until the dislocation reduces or disappears altogether.
dou chancre	 two chances
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 In the division of veins and arteries, we must apply medicine to cure it, as well as drain off the blood when it is discharged through a vein; and let the abscess burst upon healing, and in similar cases.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the case of a vein that is about to burst when it becomes empty or if there is visible swelling (rupture), you must perform another treatment by applying heat, and then cauterize the wound so as not to let any blood out until healing has taken place; thereafter carry on with other treatments until the patient stabilizes.
de ydropisie	 The dislocation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 The dislocation (eclit) can be cured with medicines alone. If the symptoms are mild and there is no other illness present that requires further medical attention, simply massage the affected area gently while holding it steady against a fixed object at its base or pressing down on the belly button to release tension in the region.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And as for these two things (tympanites and yposarche).
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 For tympanites and yposarche, if you touch the navel area (the third belly button), gently massage that spot while holding it steady. This can help alleviate symptoms for both conditions as long as they are mild and there is no other illness present requiring further medical attention.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And is similar to a subtle snare, and of rain or hail tied tightly, and on the edge of the small part; and if it costs one part, three parts, and two others, and one other.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 And when the instrument is about to remove it gently, and hold it steady until it is done.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 Here is the translation: "And if you doubt about this abscess, and let it go away on its own for a while, as long as you stay dry or bathed in fresh water, and drink plenty of water; and then apply desiccating medicines so that they become dry.
de l’estopement de la verge	 "The removal of the abscess
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 No child ever has a pus in their groin or it is too small to be of any consequence.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 "If it should happen that he cannot see the very smallest speck, then according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 "And if it is too small to prick and the patient urinates frequently, then hold it closed until he has urinated, and make him urinate, and thereafter bind again; and by chance this does not happen, as soon as urine comes out of its urethra, it will be released.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 "The part of his body which has been injured should not be moved or touched with the hand if it is a matter of fresh bleeding, as we have said, unless it is swelling.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 "The part that has been injured in its upper region should not be touched by anyone as no one knows when it is healed at the base of the edge, because they cannot urinate before their penis heals and becomes straight; this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The method of the work is that if someone gives a blow to his buttocks or behind with a hard strike as long as it is not life-threatening, you should fix up the base of the penis and its foreskin tightly so they remain still until they heal.
des pustules de la verge	 "Of the pustules on the foreskin
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many times come in the beginning of winter and have an appearance like a lion's skin, both good and bad; if you want to put them on the finger as soon as they are mild, prick gently at their base, and then bind tightly with strong cotton thread into place until healing is complete.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 If the ointment is bad or causes itching and burning, if you want to use it
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have applied it and the ointment is at its best on the skin, and has parts of both oil and water in it, if you want to use the ointment that is most dense first; and when it is smooth, if you wish for it to burn.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you are treating with the ointment in one place, make sure that none of its parts get burned, and come near to it from corruption or anything else; if it is right for all things that are black and corruptive then apply the mixture made of honey and flour which has been ground up from the wings of pigeons roasted over fire. Then treat other wounds until they heal completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And after cleansing of wounds comes
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 After cleansing of wounds comes
de la circoncision	 And after cleansing of wounds comes
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Circoncision is not just another part of treatment like the other wounds; but instead it's done for voluntary reason, and properly at infancy, so that better healing occurs, and more lightly on health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 "I say that the ancients did not know how to circumcise their children because they do not use it according to their law, and we only have what we've acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 "I have seen many masters and doctors who did it wrong or improperly, even causing harm to the boys, for they were ignorant of the law and how to do it.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 "Or the recovery comes twice, and there is double pain; and the mutilation of a finger through accident leaves it open, and wounds occur, many times occurring even when one does not master the mutilation, I want to.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 "From the mutilation that is done forcefully all over the body I have seen great beauty of experiment because the forces cut precisely as before.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, if it is very small and smooth all over; but the fingers should be well straightened out or lying on the palm of your hand; and if there is a dislocation in this manner, as if thinking of a child who wants to touch it, do not let him hurt his finger while holding the eye steady so that it does not move until it grows.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The muscles are being exercised as follows: both arms should be tense and extended, and they should alternate in that manner.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 The error in the exercise occurs when the cramps occur during the incision: then you should stretch them at your elbow, otherwise they will hold your arm steady; and repeat, and if not, continue holding it steady.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If the third nerve is affected and it causes dizziness when left unchecked, if he leaves it as long as the aneurysm remains stable, do not worry excessively about it; but if you feel dizzy from where the aneurysm is located, make sure to stay away from that part of the neck.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the pain of a sudden powdering injury is being treated or discussing powders, and if you pay too much attention to it, then it will be over in no time; but when not, as we have said, until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	 Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is often due to a cold or inflammation in the urethra, bladder, bowel, or any similar part that we have mentioned earlier. If the urine does not flow and it causes great pain as we have stated before, you should apply the instrument called "siringue", which has the form: either a silver thread-like device made of a light wire, if one can do so; or else a needle with a long shaft and half its length in diameter.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The method of releasing the urine is to take a double cord and tie it around the base of the foreskin or scrotum skin with the cord made from wool or cotton; then apply the silver instrument tightly against this part so that urine flows out easily through the tube, until all the urine has flowed. Then remove the silver instrument, wash the cloth used for binding, and repeat as many times as needed to free the bladder of any remaining urine, ensuring no pain is caused during the process.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of ailments of the vessel
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When ulcers or abscesses occur in the vessel, or putrefaction sets in, and you see distillers appear as water and medicine. If it is called "clepsedre,
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It closes, and if it has gone for three days without any improvement or if you feel the medicine stinging excessively, stop taking the cleanser as directed. If you see distillers appear in the vessel, put a cloth soaked in water over the area to help relieve moisture buildup inside.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 Either gold or copper vessels are preferred and should be more prominent; take a sheep bladder and place the distillers in it, then tie between two cheeks so that they are at opposite ends of a loop, and then thread the wick with oil and moisture remover as you did before, tying it into the instrument. Do as you have done with the vessel by pressing until all moisture is gone from the vessel.
de la piere	 of
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 We have mentioned the methods of the first incision, and the extraction of arrows, and I said that the larger one should be made in order to differentiate them by size, as well as their signs. And for veins and edges, and I will tell you exactly and briefly
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 I said that the smaller one in the vein if it was more severe than the first one would be marked by a sudden and abrupt rupture of the vein itself, with great severity; and after this, you must often bleed heavily for several days until they recover completely. And children who are between young and old may suffer from a different ailment, as they grow older, leading to less serious bleeding.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to make incisions in order to probe more deeply into what is inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 The first sentence has been translated as "The patient is instructed to let their hairs grow long and even...
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Next hold the abscess by its base and gently move it down towards your fingertips if a vein is about to be cut, preventing any loss of blood. Then place it between your hands so that both hands and forearms are free from the vein; then squeeze and touch firmly with the other hand to close the wound. If you feel the vein in this way, now tie off the artery above the wound immediately.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if you do not see any vein at all or your second finger is pressed to the side of your nose, then it means that they are short and young, and you should remove them from beneath the wound; squeeze the artery below the wound, and tie off both ends so that there is no outflow.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 "And command the minister to press his bladder with his left hand, and order him to extend it to its right side while holding open the cords at the top. Then place a spatula like this one on which there are incisions made for the cord-holding part; and after that, apply pressure.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 "Between the cords and the bottom of it, do not squeeze too much but gently to avoid tearing skin on the wrist side. And if you're squeezing from the foundation or sides, make sure there are no gaps or tears; as for the treatment itself, apply pressure with a gentle hand so that it is firm without being rough.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 "If you have angles and edges, make the incision larger; if it does not separate properly, be sure to use a small tool in your hand so that it can easily cut through; after all, do not squeeze too hard with your hands or force them, as excessive pressure may damage the urethra. If there are multiple wounds, start by making the largest one at the bladder's bottom and then follow up on each of the smaller ones.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if she is big enough to consider surgery, and make a larger incision
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 The second part of the sentence translates to: "And if she is big enough to consider surgery, and make a larger incision. If you tie it too tightly with thread or rope, as it becomes tense; but try tearing it apart piece by piece; and when you have finished your work, if there's incense and aloe and dragon poison on it, bind it up tight in oil and wine, or olive oil and vinegar cold, to soothe the abscess wound. Then reseal it at its base, not loosening the connection inside.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When you loosen it off if there is any dragon poison on it then apply a poultice with quicklime and basic lime to heal the burn.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And seal the wound and prevent further infection by rinsing it with warm water several times until it heals completely.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if you repeat this treatment many times but do not wash the wound excessively because excessive washing may cause the incision to become infected.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already tried that one.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Then, if you wish to make the incision three times at each angle of the body:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then you take the knife and make a small incision in each angle of the body to drain any remaining pus from the abscess; then gently open the wound at the base while keeping it closed around the tip, so that when you draw your finger along its length gradually, as far as possible towards another part of the body, if urine comes out, press your hand on this point which is closest to the base and close.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If the patient urinates excessively and experiences a loss of control over urination, they should lie down with urine on them and perform a urethral catheterization as soon as possible. After this is done, cleanse the catheterized urethra by removing it from the wound; then take care to keep the cold sore that has developed in the wound. And continue treating until they are healed.
de la piere des femmes	 "The bottom of women's
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 "When a woman's hymen is damaged and she has no other symptoms or complications, the doctor should consider it a virginity loss; and if not found on examination of her vagina, that may be interpreted to mean virginity loss.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 "The third way is to see if the damage occurred through sexual intercourse; and the fourth way is if it happened in the vulva instead of the anus or vagina. And for all these cases: If she denies any loss of virginity, point out that a hymen can be found on vaginal examination; otherwise, you must examine her anus with caution as well to ensure there was no violation there.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 "She tries gently and gradually towards the entrance of the vein until she reaches her root, holding it steady at its base; then proceed to cut into the base of the thigh; be careful not to move your hand from the base or else you may cause injury; after that continue cutting into the thighs, making sure they are steady as possible while ensuring there is no movement in the area. If a vein is found with bleeding, it must stop immediately and apply pressure.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 "And if you encounter similar things when trying to understand their meaning.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 "And if the vein is found with bleeding, it must stop immediately and apply pressure.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 "And when the blood flow stops because of pain," if it comes back to its place, as long as it is intact.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 A hernia is nothing more than an assembly of moisture or white matter, which forms ulcers that contain the same fluid, and are called "syphac", and once they have formed in a vein, it cannot be prevented.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 The formation of the hernia is due to inflammation that causes the matter inside the vein to expand.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 No matter the color of the fluid inside it (red, blue, white, etc.), once the assembly has formed and the veins are clogged with matter because of inflammation, then it is a sign that there is an accumulation in that area which prevents the matter from being released, as all circulation stops.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 The fire cautery, instructing the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 After the incision is made, judge whether it was successfull.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After removing the bandage and dressing wounds, command the minister to straighten up his back and extend the left arm towards one of the ribs; then take a spatula and gently scrape away any remaining flesh on top of it until all is removed; after that, apply the bandages in a row along both sides as best you can while ensuring they are not torn.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 "And if you encounter another disease, it is advisable to bind the veins that are affected by this disease, and then apply the remedy as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 "And if it is assembled into two separate parts, then these are the two branches; apply the remedy to one part as you did in the previous way. Then wash the affected area with clean water and honey. And put on another cloth moistened with wine and oil, and bind them together at both ends. Cover this bandage tightly, and lay a second bandage over it.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 "Then take two cloths and tie them together at the neck of the sleeves. The first ones will be tied to the base of the back, while the others are tied to the arm pit; and another one on each corner, then make an assembly by tying them around the waist like a belt; this way it is tightened up completely. And never use a cautery for cutting off hair, but instead you should use a subtle one that will soften the skin of the veins.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the arrow pierces through all ways that you pierce it, as long as you have a sharp one; and keep from touching its eye; and sheaths that this arrow is safe; and measures to guard against harm, and makes sure of wounds healing; and sews up the incision firmly.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And the arrow is terrifying and cannot be treated with anything except cotton to the wound; and sews up securely at the base of it, leaving only a small opening for drainage as wounds heal; and leaves the skin intact in the mouth of the wound, if necessary you can use an instrument used specifically for such things.
de l’aposteme des coions	 from the shoulder joint
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In the work of this chapter, I am afraid that many people will be harmed, as it seems to me that these things should be avoided and told separately in another section.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	 These wounds always come from the same place, and most of them occur similarly.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is by burning and cutting that wounds are made, and the site of the wound determines its color; and it cannot be avoided, as it is a grief from an abscess, or a pain from a vein, and always comes with great pain and injury.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is caused by no artery, then it occurs from the dislocation of the joint, when you press on its two sides; and it is necessary that you touch gently.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 "The veins that are inflamed and swollen due to the swelling of the body may be treated with gentle touchings on their surface so as not to break them; afterwards, when they have calmed down, it is necessary to pierce into their depths by a sharp probe in order to remove any clots.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 "If the veins are inflamed and swollen as well, it is necessary to treat them with gentle touchings on their surface in order not to break them; afterwards, if they are exposed at the top or in places where they are very close together, it is necessary to remove all those clots and the probe again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 "And if the birth of the vein is at its back, it should be pierced and extracted as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when the work is completed and there are no longer any open wounds, apply a poultice of soft wool soaked in oil or wine; then treat other wounds as much as you like.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the arm
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This affliction of the arm is like that which we mentioned before, with the softening of the joints, and stiffening when they are tight; and the cure for this disease is very painful as in this case, and will be said to it every time that one so does.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is advisable to place the ailment on one arm and then apply it to both arms as far up as they can go, so that all of them are covered; then cure the wound similarly as in the other parts or else if no blood vessels were found there will be no harm done, because there was nothing wrong with this approach.
de la routure dou syfac	 "From the cutting of the flesh
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 If the incision is made through the ribs on one side and extended down to the abdomen, then if the intestine becomes blocked due to this incision in any of its folds; or if it is caused by stretching or pulling too much, causing injury, and many other ways: from percussion to leaping around with great force, lifting up the edges of pain, and similar things. And signs that it is because of the stretching of the skin, it will be that there was a sudden injury occurred in the abdomen, which makes it hard for them to retract back into place
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And signs will be that of the cutting through the skin itself, it brings about sudden severe pain; and there are various other indications: from the bruising around the incision to the bruises on the chest, which is due to the intestine or the abdomen being pulled out with stretching.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 "And once it touches with the intestine, it remains stuck fast in place and causes great pain to the patient as long as it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these treatments of iron, where it's advisable to flee from.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 "And once it touches with the intestine, stick to place and causes great pain to the patient as long as it is pressed.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 "And no time has been burned by the veins after incision, due to doubt of its location.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 "And this often happens, and leaves the vein open for as long as it desires to do so; if it gets cold, then apply a warm compress as soon as possible, and treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia carne
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this case, do not attempt to treat the hernia by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And they said that it is done the way the arm bone is connected to the shoulder joint, in a manner where you tie the veins after cutting gently around them; and treat for the wound as we have mentioned before until it heals completely.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 There was an injury to the belly button, so it had to be treated with a belly button cure.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you sew up the stitches if the wound has healed completely.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 "The fire is applied, but there's no indication in the passage where it should be applied.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 "Relaxing the muscles of the arm
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 "Twice the muscles of the arm should be relaxed to reduce swelling and make it easier to treat bruises when they are deep.
dou chastrement	 "Severely
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 "When you are not sure about how to proceed in this text, take the simpler approach and ask for clarification or assistance.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 "I understand your instructions very well. I will translate line by line.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 When performing the traction method, make sure the patient's hand is in an even warm position while being held tight and steady; then release it gradually so that they do not feel any more discomfort after.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the stripping method: it is necessary to hold down the hand tightly and press against one of the knuckles at first, then gradually release them while holding onto another; after that, if you have burned well, let any pain or subtle pain from the veins subside; this way of stripping is much more effective than doing so through attraction as there are no veins in it to tear, except for the one place where they will be torn, and in curing wounds.
des hermofrodites	 Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 "Hermaphrodite" is another way to say transgender person or someone who was born with both male and female sexual characteristics.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 Another way of saying this would be that a woman has two penises, one on each side, which is how an hermaphrodite body can sometimes appear to the average person.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for sores and wounds is that you apply ointments to all the affected areas, and in another way, men whose urine burns when they come into contact with the genitals, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	 of the finger
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Tentigern is the medical term for finger sores which are too raw to see properly and require treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is advisable to remove the excess finger sores and apply ointment gently; avoid rubbing too vigorously as this may cause additional damage. In another case if there are sores on the mouth or tongue, then it must be treated separately from other wounds, just like how they were called "cow disease" in the past.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 "If you hold tight to it as we have described, until the cut is made.
de erratique	 "Of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 The nature of the woman is not perceived in her appearance or strength when she is young and healthy, but rather through birth or accident that occurs to her; either from a harsh blow causing injury, or from a subtle or sharp wound causing harm, it can happen anywhere on the body where there are flowers.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 They are seen as quick to come and go if you hold them for too long or too short.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is from a subtle blow that causes great pain and injury, if you hold them too long or too short; tie your hands together with two fingers, make her stand on one leg while stretching out her legs; then the wounds will stop hurting as long as the subtle blow continues, until they heal completely.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 "And if there is pain or discomfort, you must apply ice packs to the area gently.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Apply other treatments as long as the pain persists.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 "And when there is a stitch in the incision, if it's convenient to do so, close the wound carefully.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 "When closing an abscess, you must be careful not to cause any further injury.
des emorroides	 hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 "Hemorrhoids are growths on veins that one is not usually accustomed to and become worse over time; we have divided them into hemorrhoids of the anus and those of the vagina, signs and symptoms.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 "Separate the hemorrhoids from the anus, when they are close together and cannot be felt through touch; only apply a remedy by force.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those that are in the mouth of the marriage can't be sensed, they cannot be treated either.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 It is advisable that you put the woman in a cold house, and heat her buttocks with fire; and powder on her roots, then apply medicines restraining them, as garlic and dragon's blood, and similar things; and put compresses to the sores one hour, and then put into very cold water. And make sure any sores are resolved by making a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and dates and similar things, and then grind wheat, mix it with honey and put on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 If the woman is sick, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not then take some aloe vera juice and apply it to the burns on both sides gently, wait until they are cool, and then take linen or aglacier wine soaked in it and apply that too.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Once the abscess is healed and closed up securely, if there are any remaining wounds that need treatment then do so until they too are healed
des apostemes de la marris	 The sutures of the wound
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Various other diseases that I mentioned in the previous division come from abscesses and fistulae and hemorrhoids and anal fistulas and varicose veins and more serious conditions like these.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 It is important when treating an abscess that comes from the anus to note whether it is just a boil or if it is more serious; and as you apply heat and see if they turn red then take action
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Here is the translation: "Do not worry too much about the pain as long as it is bearable; and when you feel like it's time to take off your mask, remove it gently from one side of your mouth, so that there are no gaps or tears.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Here is the translation: "And when the abscess is opened and the main artery has been exposed, if it suits to cauterize over the wound with hot oil or fresh lard until all of the wounds are closed; then remove any remaining dirt and debris.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if it is healed with a cloth, you must be careful not to burn yourself while curing it, but cure as we have said in the previous passage.
de l’enfantement	 The baptism
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 A newborn's body should be examined closely to determine its natural figure, and the signs of it are when you see a woman pressing her belly downward, and desire to smell her air: for as soon as he descends upon his head, so is he joined with him, and becomes moist from his superfluities by good purification; and this will come naturally otherwise.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 When he comes upon his private parts, or the buttocks, and the hands, or he comes upon his belly, or otherwise, and is converted by chance to his back, and other evil shapes; it is best at bathing that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as they should be helped.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 When the head comes loose from its place due to natural causes, and a small child holds tightly onto it, and the body is weak, if held onto a chair or women hold on tight; and as a result of this the oil or grease may spill out, and then cause friction between the two parts of which there is little room.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 After a certain amount of time has passed, then it is advisable to make the woman lie flat on her back while holding onto her stomach tightly; and if he feels nauseous or dizzy, if possible to ask the woman to massage with oil from sesame seeds; also ensure her mouth and nose are kept free for one hour; otherwise if now he feels unwell.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out after that time has passed, it is advisable to gently hold them in place one at a time and gently; but if they cannot enter then you should lay her on her back, lift up her feet high, and let go of her arms which are by now dead.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 "The child was discharged from his legs.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child walks on his/her hands, he/she should push himself up high, and then take small steps as they become steady, until their legs are steady enough
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 When he jumps on his/her hands, if the command to straighten is given, and she is instructed to straighten her arms, if jumping occurs, it will cause injury
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if they are not straight as we have said, then he should take small steps until their legs become steady in the natural order of things.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 Because it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then if they cannot be straight as we have said, let them take smaller steps until their legs become steady; and when she is moist from exertion, put on a collar of silver, so that the air may cool her, and apply it to her nose and lips, then straighten her spine gently, and hold her mouth open and close with her finger; repeat this until they are straight.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 The child has dislocated its shoulder joint
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this way, if it keeps pulling its hands slowly and slowly, then let them hang from their stomach, and make fists with their fingers pointing up, or have them hold tightly to your neck; and keep the child's hands slowly and slowly, and have her pull them gently towards her belly button, and remove the pins as they go upwards. And so on until she is ready.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 The child has dislocated their arm outwards
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It's advisable to gently remove the arm: if she can't remove it, have her sit on a pillow and try again; if that doesn't work either, have her lie down with her arms by her side and straighten them out by pulling slightly upwards towards her head. And so on until she is ready.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 The child cried out for help as it was falling from its mother's arm.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 When the child's arm is raised gently and gradually, then it should move slightly and slowly on its own accord as we have said before, and once you have done this, tell her to be firm in holding it so that she doesn't let go; and do this until he feels tired.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 This manner is entirely different from the first one.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When using this manner for the second time and you feel dizzy or see black spots (which means that the child is too tired), lie down gently on his arm and neck, do not hold her tightly, as if she were held too tight; then lay the child down gently until you think it's alright.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of dislocations
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 Wounds that do not heal often occur, and never once in three or four cases; thus there is no need for such a thing to be done, because it does not happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 If such a thing is done, and they do not live long, it should be multiplied, and will be treated by the surgeon who severs them at the root; and never once naturally occur, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they are very tight and the treatment as we have said, and be done gently, quickly, and lightly what it does; and make sure that is worth doing for health.
de plusors enfans	 of the younger ones
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 There are no examples of any healing in marriage one or two or three or four times, and never fifteen or sixteen or seventeen, but all heal like children by measuring their growth with the glory of God, it is convenient that they be treated gently as a whole thing because through such things there were experiences; so do according to what you consider.
de l’enfant mort	 of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 After performing the procedure on a dead child or fetus, if it is done correctly as mentioned in the previous statement, and no complications occur, you are required to restrain your hands; if you believe that the woman is in good health without any accidents or fear of death, then ensure she lies on her back with both legs extended and arms relaxed at her sides. If there's a sore spot, gently touch it.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 "Then come another thing to consider. If the incision is too deep and causes damage to an artery or vein, then it will be fatal.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 "If part of it is torn off and one eye is closed, then treat the remaining part as quickly as possible.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 "If one hand is in front of the other and cannot be brought back together, then wrap it around a bone or a finger, holding tight until healing occurs.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 "If the child's dislocation is severe and comes out through an incision or abscess that cannot be closed, then wrap a splint around it tightly until healing occurs; if not, hold onto it with both hands to prevent movement while seeking medical attention.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if there is a light touch at the base of his penis, it will cause pain to the bladder and lead to ejaculation quickly
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If he is erect in the abdomen or groin, if there is moisture present that you extract with your fingers; and when extracting from his abdomen or groin, until the moisture stops completely; and any other member that moves, and cause pain to him, if it moves suddenly while masturbating, extract from its mouth.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if he is erect in his buttocks and you touch it gently, as we have mentioned before for a young child who is learning to masturbate; but do not leave any part of the anus untouched.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 When you have done this, tell them as we said before the cuts that come in our arrows: and if they are bound so tightly, then bind their eyes firmly until they grow
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 There was a woman who had been pregnant for many months and gave birth to another child but died herself.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After that he put on the bowstring tightly, it flailed as hard as an ox, and began to make great progress.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I went for treatment, but thought that much was too late, and could not hold the wound closed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I put on a strong adhesive bandage, it stuck to one bone, after some time to another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I became very sick because the stomach had no bones in it.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 I thought that was bone of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I want the wound and tied my hands tightly as soon as it became better; then I loosened them a little while they were still warm; but I do not remember that this physician advised me to give aid when the master of the stroke had extracted something,
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 to bring back his arm
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 After this comes the form of the pressure, where you have the books and then the other two pieces
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 In general, the corners should be more subtle and restricted in both ways, so that one has a large mouth and its margin of trees, and half a palm with or slightly more; and to ensure that the two joints are fixed together at their ends as well as each other, halfway between them or slightly more; and this joint must always be located in the mouth when opening up the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form is that of subtlety and lightness, made with a small amount of water or wine, depending on the strength of the tendons; and it involves stretching two fingers, if you see how, from one long finger to another large finger; and when you stretch your arm fully open across all the instruments, if you want to sit still, your hands will remain tense and rigid, and then extend both arms together in a gesture, and hold tight the instrument between your thighs; afterwards, put out your hand on the entire instrument, as gently as possible, depending on how much you stretch your mouth wide open.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 The instrument is long and full of twists, and there are many variations in its appearance; and when you see it laid out [for use], the more quickly one operates, and higher up than before by its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 "Although you may not have any tools or instruments to work with, your need is still excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 "When the second line is finished and you instruct the patient to hold tight to his eyelid until it straightens up, then gently press down on its corner so that it settles into place. And if there's a tear in this process, do nothing.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 "If not, if you can't find any herbs that open the mouth of a patient who has eaten too much, gently rub peppermint leaves or lavender, chamomile, celery and centaury; all these herbs or none at all should be cooked or boiled in water until they are soft enough to be chewed. Then place one on top of their tongue and hold it there while you eat.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If you mean "If someone has had an accident," then the translation is: "Someone
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 After this treatment is over and there's no more bleeding, if you still notice pain from the injury or have swelling in the area, it may be necessary to extract any remaining foreign object gently with tweezers as soon as possible.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 After you have given the cure and fumigation of herbs as mentioned before, if nothing else has been done that we have spoken about, do not let it out; but it is necessary to close up any openings in the mouth with a dressing of four-part foam gauze. If it happens again and comes back, then come on.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 "If you wish to perform fumigation on a dry surface:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The instrument's form is such that one fumigates the woman with restraint of the flowers and branches.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it is like to imagine a fox, and puts the chief in its nature, and places the wounds wide by the fire; and if the fumigation touches charcoal, then it burns as long as it stays there, and continues another.
de percier lou fondement	 to perceive the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The youngest born who do not have the foundation perceived, to those who are lacking subtlety: if you wish that it perceives one in its place and not miss a tiny thing, then grasp this one with oil and wine, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will move again, pierce its base with a needle and leave the hands in position, so it may not move as long as it feels numb due to the injection
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 And no matter how severe the pain or incision is, if you should cover it immediately with a bandage after curing it as soon as possible; because covering is necessary for healing wounds and incisions.
de la fistule dou fondement	 Of the fistula at its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistules that come from the bottom are dangerous and painful, especially when they occur in both parts of the body; and since such fistulas are young, act fast to prevent moisture or bacteria from entering through any wound, and no matter how often they erupt as long as it does not rupture violently.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And if there are fistulas that occur in the bladder or urethra; and by veins of the kidneys, ureters, etc.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 "And if you prick at its base or foundation and do not pull gently with a needle of iron or steel towards the fistula as there is a tight spot.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 "If there is tightness, if you gently pull on a small thread or horsehair as long as you feel the thread or hair in your hand; and if not, it will not result in removal of the fistula or swelling, as we have mentioned.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 "And when the fistula is present in the bladder or urethra (the tube for urine), if you urinate into it and cannot drain it with medication.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 "If it is present in the joint of a finger or thumb, if there is tightness and discomfort comes on, then you should not seek medication right away, but rather wait until the next time as these fistulas have no cure.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 "In the one who is not mine own and doesn't belong to me, there is hope for healing through fire if I have experienced it, and that the wounds close together as your hands are; and gently lift them until they reach their bellies, and cause them to lie flat on their stomachs. And then put a cover over them if one of them causes great trouble so that he doesn't move.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 "If the bottom of their base is inflamed and you cover your second finger with it, then know that the patient may not be able to heal if he tries to touch either his side or belly.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 "However, this treatment may not be very effective for all patients, but it does have some effect; and if the fire cautery was done carefully according to the size of the fistula opening, as long as he continues doing so on a daily basis until the patient's wounds are completely healed. And in addition perform the treatment with moistening every other day or three times a week.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 "If he is sane," which means if a person is mentally sound or not
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 "If he is not sane," which means if a person is mentally ill or unstable
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the patient is delirious and cannot distinguish between you and the doctor, he may be given a sedative to calm him down before performing any procedure or treatment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery involves two main procedures: the cauterization of lesions and sores that may be inflamed by moistures or heat, and applying a dressing to prevent further injury; and applying dressings soaked in alcohol to soothe severe burns and wounds.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 "When restored, if it is stable and does not move at all.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And when the fistula comes to its base frontally, and it squeezes both ends tightly, hold the two corners firmly while doing so.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tension, between two fingers or thumbs, if it is pressing on the base tightly and squeezing both ends firmly, hold them tightly while doing so; then cure it in one of these three ways: cauterize it like we've said, or cut through to its base by making an incision, or try using a covering and tightening it from the bottom towards the top as if wrapping around. And do not overdo it too much that you damage the surface holding onto the foundation; then cure it when possible; if it is lighter in nature, squeeze tighter still until cured on both ends.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 "And in any case the fistula behaves this way: and if you prick it at its base, and there is a tendency to cause damage to the surrounding skin due to that, so take great care when piercing into it:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 "And in the second part of this sentence, you pierce the fistula through and out completely from the fistula at its base as long as it is pierced.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 "If it is located at the base of a dense vein, then you pierce through and out completely from that vein's base; take care to also pierce its own base, and tie them together securely, hold each other in place, without letting go or moving unless they are separated; and keep them separate until the veins heal. Then treat any wound as soon as it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 "If the fistula does not pierce through in all the ways you tried to pierce it, do not worry too much.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "It is not convenient to do so without preparation beforehand, then apply the treatment as we have described, as long as it remains stable.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 "The shape of the sphenopalatine fistula is like that of a single groove or tunnel, depending on its type. On one hand it cannot be closed at all; and on the other hand can only be closed with great difficulty.
des emorroydes	 "The hemorrhages are from
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 "There are two ways in which hemorrhages can occur: either they can be caused by the lining of the throat and mouth, for example from resin or sand, small and large; or else they can be from a small amount of blood flowing into an ulcer at the bottom of the esophagus, causing them to flow out. The cure for these is to order the patient not to spit forcefully as it may cause a tear in their lining. If this occurs then apply pressure on their neck with towels until bleeding stops; if they pull at the ends of the esophagus or have a sore throat, then you must cut into their root and treat the wound.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Sure dressings should be used for superficial wounds only, and the patient is to lie still with a pillow beneath their head until they are healed or experience other treatments such as stitching or ointments, whichever comes first
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 Dry and wipe any external wounds thoroughly.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Sometimes there is a dryness of feces in the bowel, due to constipation and when the illness is old or severe
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is convenient to shave the eyebrows or remove any scurf from beneath them so that they are not damp; and then cure as long as they remain smooth, until you become sick, and so on, until you recover
dou fremit	 It says here
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Formic acid is a small insect poison that stings and causes pain when applied to the skin, and it leaves no trace of its presence; in all areas of the body, and more than any other part
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 The cure is to apply a paste made of crushed ivy or another very strong vinegar, and place it on the poison sting; as long as you keep turning your hand purple around the poison until it stops stinging. Then take away your hand completely from the poison, and wipe it clean, and scrape off the poison from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this with a paste made of ash or iron in that form and shape, but subtle enough to tolerate it;
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 do not hurt or damage the skin during cautery treatment, whether it is on a burn or the fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the form
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 There is no need to dislocate the arm or leg, or break any bones, and do not harm yourself in doing so.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 This should be done when treating children who are weak and painful; they can get hurt easily.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of cautery for small and large wounds is as follows:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 The form of cautery for small and large wounds is as follows. If the veins are tied tightly together so that they cannot be separated easily, then pierce them with a needle from one side to another (piercing). But if there is only one vein in between two stitches, then pierce it too; and if both veins have been pierced but still do not separate easily, then tie two stitches on the opposite sides. And when the medicine has been applied, if it is dense, tie a strong thread around the instrument so that cautery can be done (cauterize). The form of circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And whether it is too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or any other substance, or something similar, then let it lie in a gentle state; then stretch out the hand that holds it to its full extent, hold tight the strip of flesh around its base, and see it move, if at all. If not, tighten it more firmly until it moves no longer. And if it lies motionless for an entire night, seek greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you perform the procedure on a bellyache and then examine it closely after performing it, as long as its pain remains intense.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if it is located deep within the body or in a location that requires extreme delicacy when applying the strip, and you hold firmly to where the strip adheres.
des plaies	 wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 We have mentioned in the section on treatment of wounds and injuries; we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine later, as needed.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 "Wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and depending on where the wounds were made, as well as by what.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The types of wounds that are made are those resulting from piercing the base of the sternum, ribs or collarbone, lance, fist, sixte (quince), or other parts; and I will tell you how to treat each wound, including simple wounds on the chest due to being struck by a blunt object.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes or the chest is struck without breaking it (the bone), if you press gently on the base of sternum, ribs, or collarbone, and the skin is ruptured completely and the wound large, and you should elevate the head so as to prevent secondary injury; give the wounds fat and red meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot heal himself, whether from injury to the flesh or not having drink wine, and does not eat meat, and sits by a wound, only moistening it with oil gently, or wine steeped, and if they do pierce her, she becomes fresh throughout all of its extent, and is not moved by air or dust, I will declare that shortly after. And if he does pierce any vessels, as long as he is sane
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large like a spear and similar, and the veins are unable to join together by stitches, but they can be joined together through sutures, like I will tell of belly wounds, from stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is covered in bone and thick, and does not hold but for a short time unless it is wrapped with a bandage; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat large meats if they are cooked, so that they will be cut through, as previously mentioned, similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if it is a fracture or sprain, and there is no pulse, then do nothing to the artery unless you are trained in first aid, and immobilize any dislocation, even with slight movement as we have experienced, because when resetting dislocations, make sure that you immobilize first before performing the reset.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And if these wounds are small and simple, then perform light treatment; and apply this powder that you have on the same place where the injury occurred.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The method of applying the powder is as follows: take incense and divide it into two parts, apply dragon II divided parts, and apply live III parts, and sprinkle the powder gently, covering the wound completely until it heals and joins to all its other wounds; then let the powder dry off, if it doesn't swell. Because you must not use medicine while using the powder as long as it is clean.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 "And once it has been done only when there is no healing ointment and the wound hasn't healed yet.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when the wound has been healed, but if it does not heal quickly or there is a feverish illness, then you should apply warm poultice made from equal parts wheat and honey, until he becomes better; and thereafter, cure other wounds as well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 "And if there is a break in the bone with the wound and it's small, but only subtle pains come; I will tell you later after the fractures.
de la plaie dou col	 "of the healing ointment
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 "If the wound is small and there's no difference between the two ointments (i.e., healing ointment), but if one of them is applied
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 "The patient should leave the treatment unguarded and nothing restraining to allow it to move freely as necessary; and do not apply anything cold over the wound because the nature of the part is cold, and the continuation with heat from the brain which is the most hot part of the body; but if you need medicine soothe gently with fresh water and mild oil, and clean gently in fresh water and mild oil, and other parts as necessary according to this manner.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the wound is large, with stitches binding it tightly, then treat it while it's fresh.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 "And if the wound is small and fresh, but it pricks or goes deeper into the body; and if the artery is closed, and bleeding occurs, then cauterize with hot irons as necessary; and if there are pieces of bone, if they come out, do not let them escape, unless you first remove them completely. And if the wound was impressed upon the bone, if it pricked or went into the bone deeply; and if the artery is fresh, if powder is applied over the powdered one I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if he has an abscess or fistula, then in his treatment as I have said for my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 vein
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If the abscess is severe or prolonged, look for a powder to apply directly to the wound every hour until it heals completely, without applying any other medication that may cause harm unless recommended by medical professionals and experienced healers; but if swelling occurs, apply cold compresses three times daily at equal intervals, so as not to miss your next dose. If there are no signs of improvement or healing after four days or more, seek further medical attention immediately.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 "Treat all wounds as soon as possible; and if they cannot be healed, then there must be some other cause for their ailment.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 "If the wound is due to an arrow or spear, and it's simple in its nature; then it should be cauterized; but if it is large, then cut it out; and if it's small, then powder it off; and if it penetrates into bone or joint, then try other treatments as needed.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 "Abdominal rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 "The rupture of the abdomen is large and severe, sometimes penetrating to the intestine or intestines, causing severe damage. The incision should be made as quickly as possible; and if not immediately fixed by stitching in a straight line, then stitches are put into other wounds on the abdomen and other incisions.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 "When the wound is small and there's no threat to the intestines, it should be treated with one of these two ways: by cutting into it, as we have said, or by applying heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 "When it is cold, dry the wound in one of these ways: apply a cloth soaked with warm water or gently wring out and wipe it clean. And make sure to keep the intestine relaxed so that it does not become too stiff.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 "If the swelling begins to depart but if it is still moist and inflamed inside, then this may indicate a problem with entering; in that case you should first remove any instruments used on the wound. The first treatment involves cutting away the swollen tissue as much as necessary without making it too stiff; also make sure you use the appropriate tools for opening.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 When a wound is enlarged, if it is treated according to its natural form in the affected area, you may have relief because of this.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When a large wound is in the lower abdomen, if you do as described above with the leg and head higher than the wound, then repeat this action for wounds on other areas, until both sides are evenly matched; and it is necessary to treat each wound individually based on where it is located because of the variability of how they heal.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 When sewing small wounds, you should pierce the wound with a needle first and then apply stitches as described above; for larger wounds it is necessary to thread a stronger thread and sew with thicker stitches in order to cover more of the wound and seal off the edges until both sides are matched up evenly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I removed his intestine, but after four days he died; and the wound festered until fifteen days had passed, and then it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And they believed that he would die soon, and it was a miracle; and the wound did not heal by itself, no matter what remedies were applied; twice in every two days for as long as it remained healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Or I will tell you the two different ways of stitching: take the needle and stitch through the center hole to one side; when it pierces the right way in both ends, if you prick at that point with a needle or cut off the needle's point, then you must put them together again on another part of the wound. And this method is such as the skinner stitches the skin animals, and allows once for the first stitch and one more after to ensure it has finished properly
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching involves piercing the skin with a needle and tying it to the other part naturally, so that when one side is pulled away from the other side, the thread remains intact without breaking or tearing; then sew up both sides of the wound as before, removing any stitches that may not be necessary.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 When stitching up the abdomen with two needles as before, if there is no testimony that it should be done in one stitch or another, make a hole through which to pull out the stitches from both sides of the belly; then sew up each side separately and compare them for any differences in how they heal.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 "When someone has an injury fresh to its extent," meaning the severity of the injury is severe enough that the flesh around it becomes inflamed or swollen, if one pierces this area with a needle or any sharp object, then internal bleeding may occur and cause significant harm.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 "If the injury is simple and there are no other medicines available to treat it, you can apply mild heat oil or ointment on the affected area; this will help alleviate pain and discomfort; but if the bleeding occurs, seek immediate medical attention as internal bleeding may be severe in such cases.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The young intestine cannot heal as long as it is inflamed, and this is due to the inflammation of veins that are close to it, and for its proximity to the nervous system.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 If the abscess is ruptured and reset to this point while still inflamed; and if it becomes swollen or blackish in color, then you must lie on its left side so that the incision lies away from the veins, and prevent the blood from flowing out because there will be veins and arteries nearby; also make sure the area between the wound and the incision is kept open as much as possible to allow for easier extraction when the abscess becomes burst or opened.
de la routure dou boueil	 Of the two exits, which one do you mean?
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, if it could not be healed in any way at all, then I thought about using a lance to pierce my stomach; but this made the wound into the right side of my stomach, where it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, causing discharge from both sides. I treated him according to what I had learned, and continued to heal him gently as long as he was still healing.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 "When you see that the vein is too small and cannot hold in place, then it becomes painful but improves with time and drinking liquids; and no one can tell when there's a small tear inside where he should bind as tightly as before, until the tear closes; and after that binds another finger.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 "When it occurs in the intestine and there is no trouble with the vein, bind it to the base of another thread from inside; then tie the base of this thread as tightly as before, and cut off the thread into an arrow shape, and insert that into the intestine; and do not use a needle or thread for sewing. Instead, follow these steps in binding.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 "from a fistula
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 When a wound or abscess becomes infected when healing is delayed and becomes more severe as the infection advances.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is generally characterized by severe pain and swelling when healing is delayed or infected.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 It is recommended that you learn the treatment for a fistula, which involves using hand treatments.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 "Skin abscesses in all members of the body occur due to various causes such as poor hygiene, wounds from arteries or veins, nerves, intestines, bladder, and any other body part; if one arises in a principle member it can spread.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 "Skin abscesses of this type are painful to heal and require patience and ignorance to cure them. If a skin abscess arises in a principle member it can spread; if the abscess is deep and cannot be drained properly through punctures or incisions, cauterization may be necessary.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 Here is the translation line by line into English: "Your vein or limbs are severed or misaligned, as we have said; and if you find it corrupted further, then apply a remedy so that it becomes sane once more; but if it remains corrupt even after applying the remedy, restore its place.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 "If it is too corrupted and cannot recover on its own, then you should resort to another remedy that is natural or use some other means; and if the corruption affects one of your limbs severely and becomes unbearable, do not leave it untreated but remove all affected parts.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 "If you don't put pressure on it for an hour while leaving the wound porous and allowing it to dry out as much as possible through the bones, until it is no longer painful; if part of it becomes corrupted, then come quickly with a bandage to cover it.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was 18 years old when he experienced pain in his leg due to swelling from too much exertion and injury, as the matters came into his leg and became fistulas, and he grew weaker with each passing day; and after two years of treatment without any improvement in hand healing or recovery from the injury, it turned out that there was a large abscess.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I bought a tent at one of these markets, then asked the vendors to show me where they came from and found that some were coming in contact with other products from all different parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I got hurt at one of these markets, and in one of the stalls I found a part of my leg, which was corrupted and infected, spreading to other parts of it; I sought out what would heal this corrupted part, but could not cure it; then I came back again, and found the leg so corrupted that it showed corruption continuously from within, and I saw its damage worsening each day, until at last I found a medicine which made it sane and sound once more.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 "The evacuation of blood was complete, and there appeared on the arm a hard lump; it was in good condition and did not cause any harm or injury at all, nor came to pass.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 "And if it is convenient to do so: tie the wrist of the arm with a rope tightly and stretch upward toward your heart as much as possible without causing any harm or injury; then tie another knot around the larger one on top, and hold that one tight against the bone where you wish to apply. If you want to remove it gently but firmly, release the other end and pull it out from beneath the arm.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 "If the corruption has opened up and is located in one part or another of the body, then tie it securely to remove gently but firmly. If you wish to apply a bandage on top to prevent further bleeding from the other side, then secure the end which was originally tied first.
dou feu	 Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The dislocated limb may be caused by internal injuries or external forces; and once you have treated the injury with medicines, it will not benefit unless the affected member is kept in a fixed position until healing begins, so that any swelling of the damaged part does not spread further to other parts of the body.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If the dislocation occurs in one arm while holding the other limb still, you must treat both limbs simultaneously; and if it is in a leg when the opposite hand is fixed, then treat both legs equally as well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 "When the flesh is exposed to heat, if you cauterize it immediately or apply poultices restraining them, then tie the limb securely and wait until treatment has been completed; thereafter loosen the tied member gently, so that it moves freely.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 "No injury shall come upon you from the heat, nor will it burn you as long as there is no rust or any other material that is not a fistula present to conduct the heat into your body and cause harm.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 The passage translates to: "In the event of a dislocation, it is necessary to reset or reattach the joint. Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place and prevents motion; misaligned limbs cause significant pain and injury. In cases where the joint cannot be properly positioned after resetting, external support may be required.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 "When the thigh is positioned properly, do not allow it to come loose quickly as you see; if the thigh does loosen up, hold its base firmly so that it doesn't move until it straightens out.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 "And when they grow weary of waiting for it to subside after a long time, then their eyes will not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 "And when the veins become thin and close after a long period of time, if you don't persevere in maintaining health, then illness approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 "After a long period of time, when the veins become thin and close in wounds or those that do the opposite, then their eyes will not open after a long period of time. And if you don't persevere in maintaining health with medicines that are moist and dry, as we have mentioned earlier. If the illness is deep, it will harm them.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Pain occurs when the abscess is opened and pus is released into the wound, causing it to bubble up, and continues to do so until all of it has been drained; if it causes pain as it comes out the bone will hurt also, and there may be two large swellings, and great pain.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 After the treatment as we have described in the previous section has been done and does not work, it is advisable that you apply the fire cautery to the wound after all of its excess fluid has been removed; then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The fire cautery is most helpful when the bone and abscess are healthy, and the abscess is also healthy; and if the abscess punctures at its base, the eye must be held steady so it does not move until it grows long enough to puncture the abscess as well, then cure the wound with burning medicines which help remove everything.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 "The arm is dislocated from its place and cannot stay in position due to moisture. To reset the dislocation, you must gently move it back into place.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain on that side was severe
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The other arm, which was raised in the previous sentence is also dislocated but only at its base, and there are no bones protruding from any of the joints along its path to its origin.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The person who has the dislocated shoulder should not move it and leave it alone in its natural position of a broad flat surface.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	 "The joint's root, which is causing distress, must be addressed.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "In the case where it arises due to misalignment of the bone, it is important first to correct the dislocation at its point, then treat the joint in a manner suitable for that.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 "The neighbors come together through birth or injury, fire, and other similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 "If you are treating a sprain or bruise, do so gently and lightly, ensuring there is no further swelling, if possible.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 "The neighbors come apart through one of the two with the hand, treating that sore as necessary.
des vils	 "the ills
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 "These veins are large and full of superfluity, coming into many parts of the body; it is more common in those who walk much and work hard.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 "You must instruct the patient to cleanse thoroughly both ears once and then wash the base of the ear.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The cure for fire is done in two ways: one involves smearing it onto the sore and cutting out the black pus, while the other way is to apply it directly to the wound and cleanse everything thoroughly
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The treatment of a boil is to first apply hot water to the arm as long as the pus doesn't move or change, then squeeze it until all the pus comes out and cleanse the wound thoroughly. Afterwards, remove any black pus from your hand and start evacuation again when the wounds are clean. And repeat the process with another arm if needed.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Inflame the limb with fire until it turns red and burns to the bone, then cool it gently in wine and oil.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 "And if it is not straight but rather curved or twisted as a whole, and one side cannot be made right unless the other side is also made right, and there should be no twisting at all.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 "When the form of fire that is being applied causes a vein to break and not heal unless it is treated properly; and large lumps as well since if they were small and could treat them quickly but are instead large as we've mentioned.
de la voinne civile	 Of civil veins
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is found in legs and warm parts where there are no plants or trees; and on the ground it has no moisture; and by chance it exists nowhere but in the legs, and that causes pain to come from the skin if it comes out of the body quickly towards chest and stomach, between flesh and heart.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if he begins by coming in one leg with a great swelling, and then blisters appear on his legs, and the veins become inflamed as though from a plant's root
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And when he opens it, make sure to cover the wound with a bandage and leave it on until further instructions are given; if it is too long, cut off part of it, continue the treatment by wrapping around what's left, but do not cut into it at its root as that will cause further damage or infection.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And no matter how many times the hand rains, and least when it opens in the jointure of peace, or when it pierces, it comes out straight away, cure for that as we have said before
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 between flesh and bone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This illness is called "flesh-and-bone disease" because it often occurs between flesh and bone, and moves up and down the body, causing great harm to each member in turn as they grow on or near, and it causes doubt about its malice; for when it passes through the body, it climbs towards the head, and comes out from the belly.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you cure and treat it, if they cannot endure the pain as long as it lasts when burned with fire, hold them steady so they do not move; and larger harms than that are done, if they burst through their veins and come out of the belly, seize them tightly at the base to prevent this from happening.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 "from the pain which comes from the wounds
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This illness is called "wakirin," and it is a pain that affects all members, and when one part of the body moves, they all move together.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I called upon a female patient and found swelling in her arms, near to the armpit; and after some time, it spread throughout like an arrow across the shoulder, more quickly than nothing, as if gold when cutting through flesh into another part of the body; the pain would leave that part and move to the shoulder, and then gradually spread all over the body until reaching the other arm. She told me she was tired from carrying too much weight on her back.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I became worried when she moved part to part in this manner because I had only heard of such a disease occurring that way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 "I have tried to make it as painless as possible, but I can't seem to move my arm in any direction," the person says, looking upset.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see this disease and the pain it causes, if they open their eyes to what we have said, if the lie is treated promptly and properly, so that the constraint of the joint remains as long as necessary; cauterize the joint; and if you do not see them move after treatment with pills or injections, then other treatments may be needed.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows come in many forms depending on their shape and the direction they are shot from.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 "The joints are of those which have large and small points, big and small angles, long and short sides; and those that have two angles but no legs or vice versa, and those who have pieces to cut through. And also there is one kind that can only move in one way: either by twisting the limb as you would a cork, or it can twist back.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 "If you want to extract the arrow, which will cause death after many attempts, and if it is not properly inserted or injured, then try to heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 "The arrow sign appears when the arrow pierces through bone and causes the ear to ache if it enters near or inside the brain; in case of blindness, deafness, loss of speech, and a wound filled with pus that resembles burnt meat: do not hesitate to cure this wound if you see such signs.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The seventh sign indicates that the knee is in a bent position and is close to its chest; it also means that if the knee was previously fixed with an iron brace or splint, then there may be pain upon straightening the leg, and coldness in the affected limb as well as numbness, tingling, and dizziness: they indicate doubt about death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 The eighth sign is that the ankle sprain causes numbness and swelling of the foot; it swells up quickly, accompanied by a high-pitched cry from the throat and shivering: this indicates the need for medical attention as soon as possible.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And when the ankle is covered with gauze or a bandage, swelling of the small toes occurs; it also causes great pain and shivering: and the limb starts to move around freely.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the ankle sprain occurs in the stomach area, then indigestion may occur without any food being digested: this indicates a need for medical attention immediately.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if it sits on the belly or in the womb, and does not pass through the small intestine, there is no hope for its cure, nor can it be extracted from within.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 And if the abscess sits in the bladder and urine passes through it causing burning pain; then the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other member, including the arm and collarbone, shoulder blade, elbow, wrist, forearm, leg, ankle, foot, and similar members are safe when properly positioned
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the abscess is in a vein or artery and it does not penetrate through to me, then you must do otherwise as I have described.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 He had it at the root of his nose; he tried to squeeze it from another side and the fat on his ear; but it was no use.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 "The patient should remove the grease from the oil and paper as well, and after wiping them dry, wipe away only at the tip of the wick towards the furnace.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 "The wick from the patient's throat should be removed to a chimney; and it was Arabic ears that heard.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 "And the wick was at home in his head or belly, and he thought he was dying; and then it slipped off its place, so I removed it with water, wet it, and tied it down.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 "And if the wick is at home and drips or spills, it causes pain in doing so; and the patient should remove it gently to prevent its natural flow.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And when another man gets a wound on his face, he gets pain and bleeds from the wound; and many others
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And when a man gets a wound on his cheek close to the king, who was in decline and fell to one side; and it was all healed after three days of treatment.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If you found many wounds.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I attempted to make it quiet and no sound was heard; and he felt sharp pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the point of the arrow and put a plaster on his left elbow to stop its bleeding; but I realized later that it was from the wound.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I put the plaster on his hands quickly and it healed him quickly, making his wounds long until he felt the pain of the arrow wound again; but I was relieved.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 "I applied the corrosive medicine to the wound for a long time until it was completely healed; then I opened the wound with that same medicine so as not to let any part of the abscess be visible at all; and held the edges well tight, on one side and the other, preventing them from coming together. Until I finished treating the wound, I kept applying pressure gently in various ways, until the stitches were firmly set according to how it was supposed to look at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 "They understood that the abscess would not heal; I left it to be healed and removed the stitches completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 "I have explained the extraction of any arrow; but if you miss your cure on this matter, as books cannot fully understand and take in their entirety what I am saying, because they are so far removed from such things that do not pertain to it.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 "I say that veins are not entered through the limbs or they are closed off in this manner: either by the front side or back; and if they enter from another part, it is because a vein enters on the opposite side of them, no longer able to move once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 "And if she does not move now, if the hairs are pulled tight and smooth on both sides; and also if she is closed off in the bone, and cannot open up unless the hairs grow; and even then, if she does not move, if you gently pull at her base constantly, until the hairs expand.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 "And if the vein is closed off in the bone at one of its entrances near to the heart and some of the accidents I mentioned earlier occur because it can't move anymore; when she does not stir.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And the arm should not come loose when only an abscess is incised and there are no other movements that may cause it to loosen up, unless the arrow penetrates through.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is already loose and cannot be held in place due to moisture or any other reason mentioned earlier, then treat it gently as you have been instructed to do so that it can heal safely.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arm is reinserted into its place but cannot be seen by the patient or can only be treated with a non-convalescent wound dressing, and you fear that it may not close properly because of any other damage to it; and treat it gently so as to prevent tearing or breaking the ear.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you fail once when the arrow pierces through to the bone then it's extraction is difficult
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if you fail once when the arrow pierces through to the bone then it's extraction is difficult
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from another place or does not hit anything at all; or the joint is loosened so much that you can't see it any longer, until they stop taking hold and then extract them if possible now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 If it is held in the bone tightly, as you round your hand around and into the bone, stretch the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot be extracted anymore even after multiple attempts to extract as much as possible and the wound is dressed, then you must administer more instruments for better extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the wound is stitched up and it's time to heal the wound as soon as possible then you must cure the wound as quickly as possible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the wound is on any part of the body like the belly or in the bladder or in the buttocks and it's deep, then you must cover it quickly with a dressing to protect from further injury, and you should also cover the veins and nerves around it; after that, cut into the wound as deeply as possible, but do not go too far. And keep applying pressure until healing is complete.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 "The shape of the tendons which are grasped at their base by bird claws
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 They come in various sizes, from large to small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape at its end is like that of an arrowhead, when held at the point of the arrow.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the tendons when it is grasped and held as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 There are veins numbered 1 through XVI, some of which have up to six branches; and the arteries numbered two temples apart appear as well; and the veins of the cheeks below the eyes, called "aspirs"; and the vein at the forehead; and the vein at the base of the nose; and the veins between the eyebrows that are also known as "aspires". And the veins from the mouth.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that commonly are found in the arm: one is the cephalic vein, which is located at the elbow crease; and the other is the basilic vein, which is composed of both the cephalic and brachial veins, and it is referred to as "the main vein of the chest"; and the basilic vein if it is on the right side, is called "the main vein of the belly," and lies beneath the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The other superficial vein found in the arm is between the auricular and ulnar, and if there are two it splits off to form another vein: one at the elbow crease of the right side, which they call "the deep dorsal vein," and the second on the left side, which they call "the deep dorsal vein." And in the other leg or foot, there may be three veins: one is found between the thumb and first finger crease of the right side; another at the elbow crease of the opposite side.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 "After removing the ears and eyelids, the patient is instructed to raise their head towards the abscess, and squeeze it tightly until the pus flows out; then gently wipe away any remaining pus from around the wound with a cloth. After that, take a lancet and pierce through the skin just above the wound, then lift your hand all the way up to the shoulder blade and cover and clean both wounds well, as much as possible; after which you should tie it tightly so that it does not move, and you have said incision and cautery on the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 "After removing the eyes and eyebrows, you are instructed to squeeze the two arteries in the temples tightly, causing the tears to stop flowing from them; then gently wipe away any remaining tears around the wound with a cloth. After that, take the lancet and pierce it through the skin just above the wound on your index finger, hold it there until it is completely dry; after which you should tie it securely so it does not move, you have said incision and cautery in this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The veins in the front are as important as the head veins and arteries of the face, and migraines, and rheumatism, and swelling. And if it is that the veins become tangled, so long as the vein remains open; then take a tool called "fosseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And put the point into the vein and firmly hold with your hand or something else, then let some blood flow according to the amount you see; and tie off the vein, and leave it open until there is no more flame from a large wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 In any case, it is necessary that the flames be too much or too little, for the artery is close by chance and breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The veins of the two legs that aid these, and in turning, and swelling, and the disease of the face; their quality is such that the veins are tied tightly to each other, as if bound together, and so there is no gap.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 And if it is very faint, then break it gently; and tie a cord around the wound so that you hold it securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And the vein is very thin and easily broken, tie a cord around it so that you hold it tightly.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And when opening the vein to perform surgery or medical procedures, tie a cord around it so that you hold it tightly until all healing is done and wounds are healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 "Of the liver of a person
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The liver's function in digestion is to assist in chewing food and aid in the process of swallowing, as well as aiding in the formation of bile for digestion, and it aids in the breaking down of fats and proteins.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The liver's qualities to present itself before you and hold still as I said; then tear it apart and look at the two that are on opposite sides of it, and know this by what they are black, and by what is in them veins less dark: unless one or the other isn't seen, and doubt arises. If only one or the other is not visible, then you should make both disappear completely, as there is no other way to do so.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the liver of a person
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 "The patient should hold their tongue after the incision of the skull and place it between your hands in front of a black vein while keeping them moist, allowing you to gently move it around as much as necessary without causing too much pain because these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 "People often distinguish between two types of veins: superficial ones and deep ones. The superficial ones can be pricked easily with a sharp needle or touched lightly, while the deep ones require puncturing through their entire length.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 "The shape of the vein is typically circular and flat; it looks like this:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 "Another kind of vein is the olive-colored one which appears as a lump and contains large clots or obstructions. This type of vein looks like this:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 "And it is more subtle, and through fine veins, or it has a subtle vein trouble.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 "The vein at the base of it (the neck), which is one of those veins that brings about ailments such as those in the throat, or colon, or chest, or belly; and it is advisable for the patient to take great care of their artery.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 "And if the artery is cut and bleeding, as long as it is controlled, then there should be no flaming of the eyes, but rather just a slight one.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 "And if the base of the vein does not openly protrude (when removing it), as long as you remove one and replace it with another or if you want to remove both, or leave only the arm: it openly protrudes; and the bleeding is stopped quickly.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 "And if you find the left side injured and bleeding when opening it up, be cautious not to cut an artery; press down on it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if you see it flowing from the top like a child's urine, know that it is not an artery: quickly apply pressure and press down on both arms to stop it.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	 "And if you find the vein and it is bleeding but no artery shows through when opening up, apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 "Take a fist-sized object and press it firmly against one of the veins while keeping the other arm steady. If you can't find a vein, apply pressure to any bleeding point on your body as quickly as possible.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein is inflamed due to the chief of wounds at its base and across it, as we have said; so that the nerves are wise through this one nerve which is on it, and if it does not open in any way because of its subtlety, then you should close off the nerve's end.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between the two nerves mentioned above.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The cephalic vein helps in treating the chief wound and aids the eyes; and it is advisable to burn olive oil or menthol oil because this is the most effective of all veins as it does not have any nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Anyway, it is advisable to ask for the more gentle one and do not worry if you have to start again; and because of its subtlety, it will not harm at all times, except when you must start over.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of health depends on your thoughts
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know to stay healthy is that health cannot thrive unless one keeps it by avoiding illnesses and diseases to come, and should take place in one of the three ways listed below: starting at dawn, eating a balanced diet every day, or getting enough sleep each night.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The health which is free from illness does not have a specific duration, but when a person begins to live healthily and eat well in all hours and days; and it is advisable for children as young as twelve years old to start eating healthy meals every day.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 Do not think that staying healthy only comes after sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When someone becomes sicker and they vomit frequently, and the stomach feels pain continuously; and a third thing happens to the person's body: bleeding from the anus.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 "The patient's arm should be held in place with cords as tight as the sinew, and if it is pricked at its base, so that when light is applied to the wound, it will not open further, until healing occurs; and if it worsens the wound too much, then caution must be taken by the surgeon for fear of causing greater harm.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 "If the arm is first healed in this manner, then it will be alright; but if not, and there occurs again a slight tearing from within or without at some time thereafter, its motion will cease.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 "If the swelling is gone and the wounds are open then they should be cleansed with water or a mild liquid gently and frequently until the wound heals completely; because it often happens that the healing process takes time.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 Here's the translation line-by-line: "If you see a wound inflamed, do not rub it vigorously with oil because this can irritate the infected area and may worsen the injury; instead, apply a small amount of oil to the affected area so as to lubricate the skin in order to ease pain and reduce swelling. This method helps to stabilize and reduce bruising when applying directly on the affected spot; but if done too aggressively or excessively, it may cause further damage.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 "If the wound is large and it frequently happens that after opening a vein there are no further bleeding or greening (the skin turns greenish), then you should not apply anything from aloe vera or any other remedy in juice form; instead, leave it as such to calm down, heal, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 And many times there is abscess and appearance at the base of the artery: place your hand on it, and if you feel pain in that area squeeze tightly with both hands, as this feeling worsens.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But remember what we have said: for the treatment to stop bleeding from an artery but first apply pressure here and there as needed until the wound is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And treat each abscess according to its size and color of the abscess.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 If the abscess is black when it dries out until it turns red; and if you see a large one, let it stay as long as it is subtle; and if it is too cold, let it cool off.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And for the one who is plain and strong in extraction of abscess, make it a wide wound as well so that there are no deep cuts; but for the weak ones, do the opposite, and the best way to heal this is with frequent washing and soothing, and you must wash thoroughly until they get large.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 "And for those who have wounds that need healing, it is advisable to consume green pomegranate juice gently three times or four times a day; if the complexion is cold, then you should sip before the wound painlessly in sweet syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chiches, or aromatic honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 "If he touches the wound after washing his hands with warm water and a soothing syrup, it is advisable to heat up some broth from char; and if you want something more subtle, then use other things we mentioned in the earlier chapters or treatise on blood evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 "And if he wants to apply a poultice with another herb, as long as it is not too harsh and causes no further pain or injury.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 "And if he wants to apply another poultice after the first one, and it is very harsh, then you should wait for seven hours after the first poultice or from the start of a new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And who is seeking another way, if he must seek a second healer or physician
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 And if the patient desires to heal the wound greatly and stretch out his limb until it touches another part of the body, then you should hold him steady so that he does not move while healing, unless there is no danger in doing so; but leave him as long as he heals from the second time, or until the limb is healed. And if he extends one arm to touch a different part of his body, and holds it steadily, only then release the pressure slightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 If the vein is full, let him lie there without restraint until he is calmed down; and if you hold on to his arm while healing, as long as the vein remains still.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if you need to apply a second burn after the first one fails or in another vein, or in the other arm
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The vein in that limb is healthier than the other due to its composition.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The method of healing is to apply a hot poultice gently over the sore with warm water, as long as you have enough time; and if not done carefully, do not rub too hard, otherwise it may cause injury or nerve damage.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The healing method for the arm is as follows: apply it gently with warm water until the vein is clear, if you can; and then heal it by crossing it over all of its wounds, without rubbing too hard or causing injury to anything around it; and do not rub excessively because nerves are easily damaged.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 And when you have treated the wounds as much as possible, if it is on your shoulder and it remains stuck fast to skin tightly, then gently pull it out.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The healing of the hand should start if you are suffering from hand diseases such as arthritis; and do everything else I have told you for the right arm.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The healing of the spine should start if you are suffering from any other conditions affecting the body such as back pain, leg cramps, varicose veins, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of its healing is that it burns the hairs gently and firmly on hot water, and holds onto the vein tightly until it's peeled off, and the veins are held together by the peeling at the joints; it is applied to the arm, and through the veins, where one or more veins, wherever you like.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And if you find healthy wounds that are sore to the touch, and the sight of them troubles you too much, as they should be treated similarly: and let there be no movement in their eyes.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if they cannot stand the sight of it, then bring them gently to an end, and let good things follow in its stead.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if they have to be treated for the first time, then repeat it a second time after some time has passed, because their pain is severe: do not doubt your nerves, as we have said, and proceed with the same care for both wounds.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The veins in the wrist are at the elbow of fear, and their pain is from the ache that comes with it; when it is by a sudden injury.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the quality of their pain is that between hot and cold, strange as it comes from two places on the elbow: you must twist them in order to open them; and if they open, then apply all the same care you would for any other wound, and through twisting, and value your stitches, because they are severe, and are usually closed by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't close it, and there is no rain of the water touching or passing over it, then you will be safe from harm, and it will hold securely in place.
des sainies de ventouse	 The veins
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Veins are made of either sinew or thread-like fibers; and the venepuncture procedure may be performed in two ways: by piercing and drawing out blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 The venepuncture procedure may be performed in two ways: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or by cutting into veins that are already exposed at the surface of the body; and it is not harmful unless there are many thin veins scattered throughout the arm, which would make it difficult to extract.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And it is necessary to have medicines available at the beginning of each month or at the end, and often and frequently; because there are those who when they have learned how to sew can make knots in their hair, and around their eyes, and on their cheeks, and turn back wounds; and if someone has a bout of pain in their mouth, and lose their tongue, and get sores. And if one is tormented by these things, he sees through pain and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 When you see these signs, and especially when it is three hours since the previous dose, then immediately call for another dose after three hours from now.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The patient with the headache should seek help for the cold sores that come and do not need to be treated until after all wounds have been evacuated; and this evacuation is necessary when there are cold complexion patients or those with chills because it brings great discomfort; therefore, they must take care of them whenever they appear.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who are well-off ought to be more generous with their wealth.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The esophagus is located below the throat and the stomach, it connects to the pancreas, and empties into the small intestine, and holds food until the stomach is full or the stomach starts churning; and it should be gently brushed out if it becomes too rigid so as not to obstruct the oesophagus or stomach.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The esophagus is strong below the throat and has its own pain when irritated or inflamed, it can obstruct the artery and cause internal bleeding; and you should instruct the patient to put his hand on the sternum so that he does not squeeze the artery, and avoid causing any harm.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 The esophagus has its own mouth infection, and tooth decay, and other diseases that are in the mouth; it is below the normal health of the upper body.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The dislocations of joints are an illness brought on by heat and overwork.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The dislocations of the arms are as severe as those in the legs, causing numbness and tingling in the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	 The dislocation occurring in the shoulder is often severe with underlying issues such as dislocations of other joints, and it's important to ensure the dislocation remains stable so that healing can occur properly; and if it were subtle, a significant injury could result from it happening.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 The dislocations of the legs are particularly severe as they affect all parts of the body including the heart, bladder and groin; and cause weakness in the legs afterwards which leads to difficulties walking after a period of time.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	 "The method to apply the tourniquet is as follows: first tighten it quickly and steadily, then release it suddenly but do not let go until you see the red vein beneath the skin; thereafter, remove the tourniquet, and place a pad in position near the heart because there are those who have great pain, and many lose consciousness. If only once injured, cover large wounds, and a little padding.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 "If the injury is severe, if it occurs twice: in the first instance use smaller wounds for a subtler approach to the larger wound.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 "If the injury is very severe, if it occurs three times: in the third instance use smaller wounds slowly and slowly as only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 "If you want to apply the tourniquet and are considering using olive oil or almond oil, or any other type of oil; also, if you wish to use lavender oil or chamomile oil, or some other kind: it is in this way that it will be used gently.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And its excess is great and cold, whether it takes marzipan oil or balm oil, or oil of amber, and so on.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And when it is necessary to cleanse the rough and large pores, it should not be oiled, but it is advisable to wash after rinsing with rose water or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any other similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And for those who have moisture in their mouth when they get dizzy, or if there is dizziness from mint oil, and from sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those who have large excesses should use vinegar or chamomile tea, or other similar things, and it is not advisable to wash immediately after the bath but wait one hour or two; and do not sleep right after the bath, so that they can be washed when they need to be washed, as well as when dizziness occurs.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 "And when the body's fluids are cold and inflamed, if it is necessary to heat them gently, as with hot peppers and radishes, and similar things; and many suffer, and have pains in their limbs, and similar things.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 "And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and strong wine, between new and old, gently soothing the body, skin, and joints, restoring heat to them gradually; so that they will regain their health if they drink more than eating.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 "The veins that are to be injured should be located in the liver, bowels and thighs, and belly and back, because these members do not bear injury easily; so they must first apply heat with a hot application of vessels on it, or else there will be no healing from the pain.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the cautery applied is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 The cautery method applied is as follows:
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 The cautery procedure involves applying the hot iron method to a certain part of the body (which is not specified) until it causes the hair to stop growing and remain still, at which point one must then remove or break off the hair; after that, if any bleeding occurs, apply more cauterization techniques.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 The cautery method applied is for treating burns or ulcers. It should be applied to all parts of the body except for the head and shoulders (which are specified as being dislocated), and it lasts until the ulcer has healed completely, at which point it can only be applied to that specific area on the body.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 "Do not force the limb while it is still wet and tender, unless you are prepared to retract your hand away quickly as soon as you touch them; then apply a gentle firm grip until they become flat against each other.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 "If that doesn't work, try to apply a cold compress and hold it until the bruises flatten out. If there are multiple wounds, apply compresses to each one separately.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 "The sores will not go away while the vein is fresh or if an arrow pierces through it so deeply that they cannot be removed immediately; and when you realize they have been pricked, gently hold back any bleeding for a short time to stop it, or else cut them off now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 "The book of injuries
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 The surgeon is necessary many times in the practice of medicine and healing.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 "It is necessary for this surgeon to know thoroughly all the things contained in this book and clearly describe them; therefore I have detailed everything at length and made it clear in these chapters what they are that will be used if one follows my instructions.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 "It is advisable that we begin with the prologue of this book and discuss its purpose, as well as introducing each chapter to explain their meaning.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 "If there is an injury or dislocation anywhere on the body, whether it be from heat or cold, if no immediate action is taken to treat it promptly and properly, they will become inflamed due to lack of blood circulation.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 "As soon as the broken parts begin to heal, if it is necessary that wounds should be dressed and the affected area treated properly, with ointments or poultices.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 "The dislocation here described occurs when one limb is out of joint, which prevents it from moving normally.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 "If one's limb is dislocated and the skin around it is too tender to be able to heal naturally due to the softness of the member, or if they are simply too young; but no cure exists, please reset the joint with strong hands so that it can join back together properly, as before.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 "There are many different ways dislocations occur.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 "The first type of dislocation is the one at the elbow or arm, and there are many different ways to dislocate a limb.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 "One dislocation was from above and another while trying to write with the hand outstretched; it's difficult to describe.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And if there is a fracture with an injury, then there will also be a small gap.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And in order to restore the bone and its surrounding tissue properly, you should remember what comes naturally in your hand; and if there is no twisting or pain associated with it, then there is not a fracture; but there may be a small fracture or gap.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If you do not wish to move it with your hand alone, but instead hold onto the medicine that comes after it and gently restrain now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And when the fracture is in the arm and involves joint parts of it, you should now bring them together gently so that they are aligned properly, just as the bones join again after healing has begun; and let the bones come together if left alone for a while, until the bone heals completely; then hold onto them so that the restoration process can be performed smoothly and easily. And when restraining is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 "And if it breaks at two places, then hold the limb steady with your hands or a single hand and a forearm, whichever way you prefer; and align the broken parts according to their nature in such a way that when both pieces of broken bone are ready for healing, stitch them up tightly using appropriate techniques.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 "And please make sure your hands are steady if you think it is necessary; if the wound is bleeding profusely and not too tight or too pressing as those who come for medical treatment often do, causing pain to the member.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 "And when the members are at rest, if you gently pull or straighten it with no pain or discomfort, do not twist, turn, or move in any other way; and make sure the member feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 When there is no pain at all, then it's good to put the body in rest so that no more pain arises; and if you are putting on a straight line, make tortuous movements not to lose until the restoration is done. And the arm broken should be like this what I tell you
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 The limbs that are broken are diverse in small size and large size, shape and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 When you have small limbs like the arms and legs: if it is necessary to stretch or bend your arm gently and softly; but when they are large, as the thighs and buttocks, if it's necessary to stretch or bend them from one side to another with a strong effort, because stretching them too much will strain all the limbs equally, and will immobilize any limb that may move; then straighten out the broken part gradually until restoration is done. And afterwards you should return to the other limb, and repeat straightening out the injured part; and thereafter put your hands well positioned so they do not move in or out excessively.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 "If the arm or leg is dislocated and positioned correctly, release it gently but firmly; then hold its end and let go of all others. Then secure your fingers tightly to avoid further dislocation.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 "Ensure that the end of the bone is slightly larger and wider than the others; as well as long enough to match the size of the arm or leg depending on which limb it is. Then, hold your fingers tightly until the bone grows.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 "After the dislocation has been corrected, if you prick or puncture them with a needle, avoid bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When a joint is torn by frostbite, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And if there are breaks in any of the bones, it's important to fix them first.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And when the members are large, it's important to wait until after 7 days or even longer according to your own judgment; and if you use this ointment with enough fat content, do not apply too thin nor too thick, using a light and medium thickness, as that is how most splints restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: and when making the mixture, hold it against a smooth surface and smear it evenly.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 Another way to splint fractures and dislocations is to mix bark, dates, and aloe; with X amount of each; and then make powder and smear it with some fat content.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another way to straighten it is by twisting: first grasp and twist the limb, then release; after that tie the ends together with a strong thread, and tighten as much or even more than before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to straighten dislocated limbs is by gently moving the ends towards each other while soothing the pain that may be present and reducing swelling of the limb; first apply a new bandage over it tightly and securely, then immobilize your arm or leg with a splint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 Straightening splints should not leave the patient in pain but rather help to alleviate discomfort by immobilizing it properly and soothing any remaining pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Another way to straighten a broken bone is by using fresh willow twigs and flexible grass twigs and tying them together; then fix the splint in place with tape or something similar.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to heal an arm fracture is by using a splint to support the remaining part of the arm after removing the cast or sling
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Grind root of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violet petals, flour of vinegar, make one part; and brew it with wine, and apply the mixture to the limbs, using a moist or hot compress made from fresh ginger and coriander.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to heal more than one arm fracture is by taking multiple parts of the root of marshmallow...
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Grind root of marshmallow, and linseed, balm, millet, and saltwort, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all or one part; and brew it with warm water or honey, or wine depending on the limb's condition and rest period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 The ointment is recommended in his book to heal a fracture by applying wax and oil to the limb, nothing else more or less; it should be applied neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems strange that one should put in the broken limb, to repair, a few things soon, as mirrors and candles, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Another way to extinguish pain and suffering is by pressing down with great force on the eyes or nose, or piercing them through the eye sockets; and you break it, and in breaking it there is much blood, so that it is extinguished and death follows quickly.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After some time has passed and the pain is lessened, hold gently with a clean cloth soaked in warm oil or water and press lightly on it until the heat subsides and the inflammation is gone.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 "And if you find that the eyes are closed and swollen and painful, I have already mentioned this, so make sure to stretch them gently and gently, if necessary.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 "If the patient finds that their finger is swollen and painful after following my instructions as mentioned earlier, then gently stretch them to relieve the swelling and pain.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 "There are many ways of injury.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Dislocations often occur due to blunt trauma such as a blow or a fall.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 Dislocations can also occur when the bone is hit from behind or sideways and are called absolute dislocations. The injury in these cases tends to be more severe or minor, respectively.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if the dislocation is caused by striking the shoulder blade from behind or above, hitting against the sternum (breastbone), etc., it can also happen in these ways.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if the dislocation occurs with force against or near the bone itself, causing significant injury to the limb as a result of it occurring close to one's body, that is a serious injury and could be large or small in its consequences.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 If the injury is caused by a blow to one of these small bones or joints close to it, and if there's a small fracture as a result, that can be called a "capillary" dislocation, where part of the bone enters through an opening in the joint; but if the injury was caused by a blow on other parts of the body or near the sternum (breastbone), causing the bone to enter from elsewhere and the consequence is severe.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 "And this is also what happens when one has or the main reason for moisture, as with a young child; and it has all these ways of breaking that the smallest ones are broken in the same way; and I will talk about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 "We know all the ways of fractures through the process of dissection and the interrogation of bones, and by way of radiography.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 "The hair similarity is caused by that when one discovers the bone, if it has a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 "In the cure of the fracture, be cautious about any bad injury that may occur, such as vomiting or choking, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes becoming red and swollen, and other similar things; if doubts arise.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 "And if you don't see any bad accidents occur, but expect recovery to start with the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when it first comes to you, and that is in the ear, if necessary, then put your finger over the thirteenth hole on the mouse
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And when that is in place, if you have difficulty removing the earpiece from its seventh hole, make sure it's properly inserted and accidents should not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And when the earpiece is removed from its seventh hole and captured by the cord, if necessary, then gently remove the loose end of the cord; check that it is properly inserted into all the holes on the mouse.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then there is another dislocation even greater than this one
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And the second way is that you have many different sizes of joints, some are straight and others curved, and they can bend, and be made of iron; and in gentle use, one should not touch the joint's base.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 And the third way is that you should bend them gently and firmly if necessary to straighten them out without touching their base.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 The characteristic of breaking the bone is that you should straighten it out completely and then put it back in place after some time has passed, and if necessary, gently straighten them again. Make sure not to touch anything around the bone or with your fingers; also make sure not to touch the base of it either.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 "And when you have finished the operation and it has been done with any other instrument that is similar to an incision but it should be more gentle and subtle than the previous one, if nothing is done at all of the small bones, no nails as they tightly bind together, if they are not very carefully treated wounds. Then cure the wound as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 "Another method of doing so is to use a small wire, which is more gentle; and also the way it is done very firmly but gently.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 "It is first advisable to cut off a part of the bone where it may be broken. Once you have done that if you take the main cutting instrument gently, then its shape would be like this:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 "Don't cut off both ends of the bone and leave one end sticking out towards the body. Then tie it with a small thread so that you gently pull all around, tightly pulling it tight, then tie well to hold back the skin which is attached; if there is any left on the bone itself, tie it lightly as well because when it's tied properly, it won't cause pain or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 And the bones of the arm cannot pierce through to it alone and are held only by sutures, and a small piece is required if desired for more precise treatment according to the nature and size of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 If you have large sutures or smaller ones that need attention without stopping what needs to be done as much as possible.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 It is important to treat the other hair fractures and small ones according to their location; this is something that one who has studied in this field should know.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the burn is severe and you apply too much ointment, be careful not to smother it with bandages as soon as they are applied, for when wounds are stitched together at the site of injury, pain may occur; moreover, if a caustic substance has been applied, it should only be cleaned with water.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 "The wound has arrived at a critical point, as we have stated, so it is doubtful that any healing can occur.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And the blood does not return until after medicine is applied as described, where you apply a third of honey and three drops of oil to the affected area; then perform treatments in accordance with how they are done.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 "Abscesses that occur once and only once are abscesses of the second type, which are found on two bones in the area, as they are cartilaginous and do not heal if not properly opened or twisted.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 "If one of the second type of abscesses is broken, it should be cut open with a sharp knife and the base exposed to drain pus, while holding the edges steady according to their natural shape; perform this procedure gently, making sure they do not feel pain in the area.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 "And the fractures occur at the site of healing and cannot return to their original place if it is convenient that you tie them gently in a bandage around the wound.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 "And if the fractures are in another place and cannot be restored by doing so, then you should wait until seven or ten days have passed as soon as they become calm, at which point you should gently remove any bandages from that area.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 "Or if they are in another place as well, then the fractures have occurred there too; and their wounds may be so large that they fill all of the veins.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 "And it is recommended to cover them with poultice and wait for them to heal.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 "It may not seem to be good, but it is recommended that the poultice be made with a mixture of honey and flour, then leave it on as long as they are wet and soft.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 "And no matter how many times one tries to separate from them against their will, if they are tightly bound together, and the hairs among them move, then it is impossible.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 "And when the patient holds tightly to what they are trying to separate from, whether it is a clot or cotton wool soaked in oil or any other substance.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the substance they are trying to separate from is not flammable or produces smoke when burned, then it must be broken up into small pieces and tied together lightly; and it should be cured with a strong fire so that nothing remains of what was tried to be separated.
de la routure de la mandibule	 The opening of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is opened without any damage and the lips are split only slightly, but do not tear away from two or more pieces, as long as one understands gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 It is advisable to bite on the right side of the cheek with your left index finger; and for splitting the jaw from the front, if you hold your right index finger in place while holding down the edge of the mouth with your other hand gently.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the split in the jaw is deep enough to require an additional part of your body extending from above, as long as it remains stable.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 If movements of the jaw occur, or if it becomes dislocated due to injury from gold wire, silver wire, or silk thread; then place a bandage tightly around the jaw and attach another bandage above for support; apply a large, well-made bandage or a piece of leather long and wide covering the jaw as you please, and command the patient to rest comfortably while eating light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 "And when you see that the figure changes, if his disease worsens, and then reset it so that it remains in place; and put the plaster over a cotton wool or flour of sesame, after you have applied the cautery; and put on light glue for the bandage, and let its position remain steady, and the pain from the limb does not change, leave as is; many times this happens in three days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 "And afterwards, if you have said it many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 "If he has a fracture and wound together, make the nosepiece of the bone firm; if the injury is small it will heal easily.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 "And if the wound is severe, widen or narrow the flame according to need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When you have applied all these pieces and it does not worsen the wound if its severity is great, then apply some light glue to cover up; prevent the pain as long as possible.
de la forcele	 The force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 The dislocation can occur many times with the shoulder and is broken in three different ways: it may be fractured and healed but still weak, or have a piece, or be lightly repaired. Or there may also be a tear from an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 And when the dislocation is accompanied by an injury to the joint, you have two options: either apply pressure directly on the dislocation or extend your arm towards the affected area; then position the dislocation between your hands in a way that suits the situation and neither appears nor moves around.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if you want to immobilize the arm more completely, position it in such a way that when rolled up with a bandage or rope, it is tight enough for your needs; and gentle but still strong, holding the shoulder firmly in place so that you can move the dislocation as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 "Do not pull the arm away from your body while you are fighting because if it is convenient to have your arms by your side during a fight, make sure that they stay in place as long as possible.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 "Secure both your arms and if you feel threatened, defend yourself. Do not let the weapon's edge get too close to any of your cuts or wounds, but keep defending with it as long as possible.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 "Take a spoon and try to swallow it whole without breaking it in half; make sure you don't break the spoon in half as long as possible while keeping your arm relaxed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if you prick at your base, hold steady so they do not move until they grow
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And if you prick at your base, hold steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 When the shoulder dislocates outwards or upwards and cannot be put back into place through gentle touch alone, then you should apply a rigid bandage firmly to keep it in position until the dislocation is reduced; repeat this process whenever necessary
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 Before applying pressure to the bone directly, and make sure you know how much force is needed to ease the pain of the abscess; then apply pressure in order to relieve it.
de la brisure dou pis	 Of the two fractures
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The leg is often fractured but not always immediately
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is fractured externally and the damage is severe, then vomiting occurs and the patient's body is convulsed in an attempt to expel the stone
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the restoration is to place both hands on the abdomen and press down into it gently while drawing up towards your chest with a slight motion between your fingers as you draw them together at the ends of each arm; and then release them and close them tightly, holding for a moment or two until they are firm; and then release them again quickly but not too fast.
de la brisure des costes	 Of the break of the shoulder
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 The dislocation of the shoulder occurs when it is dislocated from its place and prevents movement afterwards, in particular at the front and top, and they do not move unless they are fixed first.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 If you set the dislocation as it should be, then everything will return to normal.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And afterwards apply a plaster and hold tightly with an adhesive bandage so that you may mend it properly.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 If the dislocation of the shoulder moves downwards towards the chest, causing great pain and stiffness, then it is necessary to seek medical help as quickly as possible because this could be a serious injury.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And if someone says that it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the belly in order to reset the dislocation from its place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 "We do not care for what we have done as long as it has been completed.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if you have finished doing it, then
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 They will not cause any harm to the limb if it is well positioned and stable, as they are accustomed to doing so; however, doubt may occur due to the fragility of their actions.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 They will not cause any harm if the patient is well positioned with a damp cloth wrapped around it to prevent sudden movements; and afterwards either apply heat or cold compresses as prescribed for pain, inflammation, and other medical conditions.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the patient will have great pain when touching the skin of their limb if they are not positioned correctly; and there may be doubt about it if one tries to break through from the outside, and must use protective gear in order to ward off such injuries; unless a bone is broken, and only then do you need to cut into the flesh, and treat wounds carefully as needed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And after making the incision of the abscess and applying pressure with the linen cloth on it, he removes the linen cloth; and meanwhile he applies the cure to the part which is in need, whether it's the arm or the leg, as long as it is sound.
de la brisure dou col	 "of the two halves of the column
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 "There is no fracture in half of the column, and it breaks easily; also to the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 "And when this occurs with no fracture, and you know whether it will be sane or not, if you see its hands soft and limp and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch, and when you prick a nail, it does not hurt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 "The sick person is very severe and if they do not move when held tight and are still, then the bone fracture is saved, and that the arrow wound is cured, as long as it is treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And the body has come from two sources, and you will see if it is sane or not, when pain arises are they swollen, and whether it is an accident that happens to be in one's hands, and with regard to the abdomen, if it is vomiting spontaneously
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is sick at its back and wants to rest, he cannot
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 It can be deadly if not treated properly in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And the accidents are milder than that one.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment is to treat it gently and patiently until it subsides; then put on some soothing ointment or cream, and bind with a bandage; and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep near that part where he feels the pain, as long as it stays sane.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if any bone breaks, whether it's the leg or arm bones, please tie your free hand to the other hand with a tourniquet and hold tight until medical assistance arrives; then treat the wound as soon as possible, and bind tightly so that nothing can move around the treatment area.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 bone dislocation
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 When a bone dislocation occurs, especially if it is severe, and there is pain in the arm or leg at the time; then tie tightly, loosen gradually, hold firmly, and comes with great pain, numbness, and swelling that breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 And once the bone is reset, hold tightly while you set your arm in position; and you should check for any breaks or deformities; and if there are no breaks only then can be aligned as naturally as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 "And when they break loose or fall off if you prick them near the belly, as long as their restoration of these breaks is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 "And when you have placed it near the ear, then place a strip of fur or cloth on top and hold tightly while they heal, as long as they remain intact.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 "Instruct the patient to let their hairs grow near their chest if possible, or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	 "And the abscess is opened, and if there are no accidents, then tighten as needed, return to the restoration, and hold tight if necessary.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 "Of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 "The assistants are those between the shoulder and the top of the arm. If it is dislocated, if you need to restore in one way or another; either way is that you apply a strip of fur or cloth tightly.
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 "Remove the two links and let it hang loose, so that you can feel for any rough places on the surface; then apply some butter to your hands and wipe away whatever may be left.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 Another way is to wet the abscess with water and then gently stroke it between your fingers while holding onto its base, instructing others nearby to do the same until it comes out.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you think that extraction should be done more quickly, hold the base tightly and squeeze it until it comes out; and also stretch the skin around where the abscess was to close any wounds or tears that may have formed there.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the dislocation is of the shoulder joint, it may be necessary to gently stretch the skin away from both ends and hold onto it tightly while it remains relaxed at its base; then release it as appropriate and hold it steady until released.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 "And when the shoulder is dislocated and you cannot restrain it securely with seven joints, put your hand on its side or back, hold the elbow, and put your arm against the shoulder, if the arms are aligned correctly so that nothing can push them apart, unless they are out of alignment.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 "If you doubt that it will move, put a larger and stronger one between the two sides of its opening, so large that air cannot pass through them both together; then hold the elbows, as I said at the beginning.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 "When you see the opening of the elbows and the stretching, as we have said before; if it leaves in a place where seven joints hold it securely, look at the three joints connecting them to ensure they are not too loose or separated so that movement cannot occur.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 "And if you say so.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 "If it does not happen or if no injury occurs after three days or more, and the limb remains stiff, and its hands on its stomach, and puts an assistant to move gently, and looks for any movement in the arm every hour or so; until the joint begins to heal.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 "It is customary that the joint and the arm should be reset every four days, unless there are complications or other issues.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 "If it remains stiff for more than two months,
de la brisure du bras	 "Then the arm is broken.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 "The arm is composed of two bones: the ulna (the smaller one) that connects to the forearm, and the radius which bends it.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the fingers are pricked they heal quickly, but when the finger is broken then healing is severe, and more painful than when it was pricked together with others.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only one finger is pricked gently, then the healing can be made light and gentle, and laid flat.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the great finger that is pricked, then you should stretch with force and extend up to the knuckle of your hand higher than others, and the finger itself must be lowered lower than others, and so the fingers on top must cover him, as well as those below; then extend the ministers across from one side to another arm.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And finally place them in their best position
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if there are two or more breaks in one piece, make sure to straighten them as much as possible, and you should not restore it until all the pieces have been straightened out as well as before we said now.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	 "And with the bruise there was pain, I told the single physician;" if you take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 "And when starting to restore the dislocation, if you use a soft and gentle lubricant made of oil and wax, that should be neither too hard nor too soft; and hold it gently but firmly until the joint is calm.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 "Then apply the lubricant made of flour mixed with oil to the socket of the joint and hold it steady while you work gently but firmly, making sure that the joint is stretched as much as possible without damaging it; make sure that there are six sockets or arms for each limb, so that you can either stretch one arm through the socket or the other. Hold them more strongly at the joint than anywhere else, and do not hold on too tightly while applying the lubricant gently but firmly.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 After rewinding a member after some time
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 If there is an accident involving the member, if itching occurs on the member, it should be treated with warm water to soothe and stop the itchiness until it subsides. And allow the member not to be tightly pressed in order for it to rest properly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then reapply the ointment and gently massage the wounds, cover them with clean bandages, similar things that may occur
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And make sure the patient stays still, as it is too tender, if necessary you should gently apply ice packs to keep them still, and then bind them tightly until they stop moving.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 There are no other things that we have mentioned here which may occur to the patient, except for the dislocation incident as mentioned earlier.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 It should have a gentle touch on the forehead and cheeks, with no movement or discomfort during sleep, in order to prevent any potential injuries, depending on the composition of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	 of the break of the arm
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 There are times when we have bruises on both sides of the arm and it comes but a little bit often.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 When the hand is fractured or injured in some way, it should be held tightly together with a bandage and extended to keep the bones aligned properly; after this, an anchor must be placed so that both ends are at equal distance apart from each other.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 When the hand breaks at the wrist or in any other way below the belly button, if a bandage is placed and commanded to tighten around the injured part; then hold down one corner of the bandage tightly against the broken part, and let it stretch so that both ends are far apart from each other.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 "And if the hands are outstretched and straight, then bind it tightly to the hand on one side, and another from opposite, so that both arms stay together.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 "And if one of the two goes first and holds tight with its palm against another bone that is opposite, then bind it tightly to both sides; or you can tie them all together in front, whichever way suits best.
de la cuixe brisie	 "From the broken arm
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 "The joints of the broken arm often break easily, and it can be seen when turning in front or back, and the restoration should bind tightly to both sides.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And when they break from their place, it stretches them closer to each other's side; and that is when the fracture occurs.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if they break at the root of the vein, when one is pulled towards it, and others are torn from its opening.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is at the elbow, and when one of its veins extends towards it, or it retracts itself; then put your hand on top of it, hold it steady as long as you can, until it is in accordance with its own nature, and then let go, because it will happen.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 And if you have a burn, if you leave it to heal then return in time for your care; the treatment is done with one method
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is important to stretch the veins between the leg and arm three or four times, making sure not to overstretch; then tie off both ends of the vein with a thread so you can extract it later.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 "If it occurs while the person is lying down and they're unable to move because of the dislocation, then you should gently try to straighten their spine first.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 "And if any bone is broken in the process of resetting the dislocation when doing it with your arms and legs, then you should only perform a soft tissue repair to fix up the wounds.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 "And if any bones are broken in the process of resetting the dislocation and it takes more than one attempt or less depending on the complexity of the cases.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 This phrase is not grammatically correct but seems to be a nonsensical phrase. It
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 "And if the process of resetting the dislocation causes fractures frequently.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 "If only a small fracture occurs but is not critical and does not cause significant harm or pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the restoration is to put everything in order as soon as it happens and you've made sure there are no other breaks or accidents that need attention first
de la brisure de la jambe	 arm
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 The arm has two bones called the ulna and radius; one is also known as the medial malleolus or mustelus, while the other is called the lateral malleolus or fossile. When a break occurs in the leg, if it's just below the elbow (the area at which the ulna bone usually connects to the lower arm), it is known as a distal fibula fracture; whereas breaks above this point are known as proximal tibia fractures.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if both bones break simultaneously, then they occur in front of you.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if it is broken badly, then severe pain occurs, and one sees well.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 And if the extension is performed correctly and firmly while keeping the eyes even; but always, it is advisable to break gently, so as not to cause injury, and with lightness.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have completed your operation, if there is pain on one side of the leg and not on the other, or if it begins to decline towards either side or to straighten out; then make an incision as soon as possible, in case any accident occurs; and remove all the stitches, to see whether there are any abscesses. If the wound is healed, you must be cautious about movement.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 "The breaking of bones is painful.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 The shoulder bone does not break, but if the arm breaks, it breaks very rarely and never without cause or reason to be extremely careful
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 If an arm bone breaks and you try to straighten it with the other, if they hit each other like stones on a hard surface then that is painful; when trying to lift them up, press firmly until they grow in length; after this bind them fast with bandages and take great care of them.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 Once the first and fourth ribs are passed through, if you miss one then there will be broken bones either in or out of position; so take great care to ensure that no ribs are damaged.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 If there are no breaks but if one or two ribs break through, then bind them with a bandage longer than the other and wider as well, so that you hold tight to the rib bone with the bandage; also make sure it is held securely in place after all are out of the way.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And it is necessary that you do not ignore the other things I have mentioned and others breaks, except those we have spoken of; but to prevent any injury even if they occur,
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 from the break in an arm
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the arm bone is broken and the woman lies on her back with her arms raised, then she should lie flat on her belly while holding a pillow to support herself, and after washing herself thoroughly wash off all of it in nature; after lying flat for some time, fill up the vagina with cotton again gently and let it stay there without any breaks, as long as it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 "When the arm is broken or the leg, if it is moved as we have said in the case of the thigh bone, these fractures are hidden from one who puts his study and his use, but not by someone else.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 These breaks mean more than just a way to restore health; they signify
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 When the verge is broken, take a twig and tie it to the mouth of an onion, then wrap your bandage around it until you cannot lift or move it anymore; it will be good for healing.
de brisure avec plaie	 Break with wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is good for the person who has a break with wounds to be healthy now, especially if it is large like the arm or shoulder, as our experiences testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound is healed and you have nothing else to do, then come back later to reset the dislocation as soon as possible or whenever it occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And the arm stays dislocated until they are held steady, and no further harm comes from it
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 If you gently pull the dislocated arm back towards your body at an angle slightly extending your hand.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 If you gently pull the dislocated arm back towards your body at an angle slightly extending your hand.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 You say "palinch," meaning "carefully."  You gently pull the dislocated arm back towards your body at an angle slightly extending your hand until it is properly set and straight with its shoulder bone in place.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 "And if you gently grasp the bone while the muscles are able to hold it in place.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 "And if you cannot pull the bone back in as we have advised when using a suitable instrument to do so, or incise or suture your wound.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 "And once the bone is pulled back, and it causes great pain afterwards, such that he cannot be in his own way.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 "After pulling the bone back in and cleaning it thoroughly with a black and pure bandage, properly sealing it up when you have restored the bone so that no injury or corruption can come from any source, keep it covered tightly according to its size; also ensure that it is not bound by the dislocation; many times this has been done without causing the harm of death or damage in any way. And if there are more severe injuries than others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is large or small, you doubt whether he has already suffered from it, as we have said, and true pain comes to him who cannot bear more of this; but I will put a bandage on, instead of these, hard dressings, and bind them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 After you have applied what we call the first dressing or second, if it is in its place then stick on another dressing to prevent bleeding from wounds, such as tetra-farming dressings and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 It is necessary that you hold the second limb in place three times a day, morning, noon, and night, as long as it remains steady and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limbs be held together in such a way that they can move easily when needed to apply dressings or bandages.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And as long as it remains in place, it cannot heal properly and there are small fragments of bone that come from it, so you must want to put the dressing on tightly, and remove all these pieces that bring about this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 "And a fistula comes to light or another way of infection if you treat it as in your medical practice.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 "And when the bone is broken and it penetrates into a limb, whether from the thigh or elbow, if you do not stop immediately but let it be, for many times people die after several days of treatment.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 "Of bites that come from the skin sores
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 "Many times after the treatment of a sprain occurs especially near the joint and the limb may no longer move naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 "Do you know what it means that 'the patient's property is as if it were in pieces well made'? It means when the patient's condition worsens.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 The first member to become weak after the dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 After the restoration of the bone and after weak members have recovered but before they regain full strength or ability to move normally, there may be other causes for weakness such as: when one part was too narrow causing it not to fit properly; if he had too many layers making it difficult to bring back strength; from excessive movement which caused fatigue; or because of a lack of blood supply in the bone due to its being weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 After performing the cure and keeping it moist, make sure you do not multiply the wound; also administer warmth, drink plenty of water, and keep the limb elevated above the head so that swelling does not occur.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 After surgery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 After surgery
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And there should be no continued movement and swelling of the affected limb after surgery.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Only allow limited movement to the affected member at any given time.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And it should be twisted and bent as much as possible, like the joints, and needs to be applied to the iron if necessary for healing purposes, with gentle incision and care in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 "Here begins the book about dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When a dislocation happens for no reason at all, if you want to try and get it back into its place now.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 If you delay it too long and the joint becomes inflamed, when resetting them they will have pain in their joints; for this reason do not move it until its cool down, then gently massage the limb to restore blood flow, and cure any injury as if comes back into place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 I have ordered the doctors of dislocations from their chiefs.
des mandibules	 the arms
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 "The jaw muscles become paralyzed and the dislocations are frequent: either they are stiff but not severe or completely paralyzed and tense towards opening the mouth so that saliva cannot be held in; one cannot close their mouth, and swallows their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 "When dislocations are slight, they come back many times.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 "If it is complete and severe, you should reset the dislocation gently without causing further damage to its surrounding tissue. To do this, hold your thumb on the base of the dislocated joint in order to apply pressure with one hand while moving both arms.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 "Keep checking it regularly as it regains its original position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 "They will be tightened up," she said gently and slowly, "and the two mandibles will work together, as long as they are kept warm.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 "When they are gently and slowly held together," she continued, "and the two mandibles will work well to lubricate them with oil and wax, then tie them lightly between two pins so that they cannot move separately but stay in place as a unit; and sleep on their backs, keeping their heads between two pins if they do not want to open or close too wide. And once tied gently," she added, "then gently adjust how much you need to tighten the lips without causing pain, ensuring both mandibles are well lubricated and staying closed together.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 "The two mandibles cannot be held in place for more than an hour," she said gently and slowly, "nor can they be untied from their lips, if there are many fevers or other conditions that cause discomfort, and by chance vomiting occurs.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 And when you see this happen, know that it is a disaster; and many times those who had it happen died in seven days.
de la forcelle	 of the rope
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The rope cannot be separated from its ends and knots, it is always torn apart in the end; thus, it is not worth trying to do so.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 Then the healing process begins with stretching and relaxing of the arm, then pressing down on the elbow to bring it back into place, holding tight while restraining from moving as much as possible; afterwards, put an elbow brace on and hold them in place, instructing the patient to rest their arm as long as they remain sane.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 "The dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 "Shoulder dislocation can occur in three ways: when one dislocates the upper part of the arm below; when another dislocates the lower part of the arm; and sometimes it occurs at the bottom part near to the shoulder itself.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 "And sometimes it occurs due to a sudden blow or impact near the shoulder, and causes dislocation of the shoulder itself, causing injury.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	 "It is advisable that you immobilize it as soon as possible; and when you begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 "The dislocation of the shoulder can be noticeable to determine whether it is healthy or not by observing differences between them and looking for a difference in their movement; as well as if one is dislocated higher up on the arm while the other is not.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	 And the manner is that they minister gently to the wound on high with the thumb and fingers, then bind up the edges of it firmly, and gently ease out of its place the jointure at the top of the limb, and they minister gently to the hand, and spread them wide open, so that they may be set free; if he come to his end.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if she does not come as we have said after some time has passed, then it is necessary to soak the wound in hot water and minister soothingly and gently, using decoction of sage and fennel and mallow as a bath; they should be soaked or bathed. Then place them on their back so that one edge may lie upon a straight line if possible, not too hard nor too soft, then place them at the foot of the shoulder; and another ministering to the shoulder blade will draw it down gently from above towards below, without causing pain, he will bring his hand up to meet it.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 "And if it becomes too rigid, do not attempt to move it at all, as a dislocation may occur now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 "And another way to do this is to gently pull the arm towards you while holding it steady with your other hand. If the joint returns into its place after a few tries, then continue doing so until all of them return into their correct positions.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 "Then straighten the arm while holding it steady with your other hand; hold both arms out and let them hang loose for a moment, then bring one arm across to meet the elbow of the other arm as you would cross your body in front of another person.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 "And when she is done with this procedure, you must gently lift her arm to the side while holding her elbow tightly and pressing it against your chest, then straighten out her shoulder and hold onto her hand at its wrist.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 "It's important to rest for a while as the limbs are being supported in this manner, because it will heal more quickly. Then continue massaging every hour or two after that, and move the limb when you feel stiffness.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 "And if the dislocation occurred due to moisture or any other reason, it is advisable to apply ice packs at three points near where the procedure was done.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 "If you do everything right and it stays after seven days, but the dislocation never releases from its place, so that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is being pulled or stretched in any way.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The dislocation that occurs over the shoulder and the arms or back, if it is caused by force, and sustained with hands, and only then can be treated.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 "After treatment the member may start to move again, slowly and gently at first, until it returns to its original position.
de la dislocation dou coute	 "The cost of dislocations is high.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 "When the joint is loose and painful, it is repeatedly dislocated, and also from all sides, in front and back, but cannot be reset because one sees clearly that it happens often, and feels a great deal of pain.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 "And when you tie the knot tight with a healthy one, if you see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 "The joint is loose and cannot be tied to the arm; nor can it press against its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 "And it is important to reset the dislocation so that it returns as soon as possible, because if not, there may be great pain and injury.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 "If it is successful and as soon as it occurs, you should hold its arm with both hands; extend your arms out wide and keep them spread apart while making sure they are not touching each other.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 "If the dislocation is in front of you and comes back when it doubles its arm against itself, fear not as long as your hand stays clear of the root of the thumb.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 "If it does not come back to its place, you should perform a forceful extension; and if two ministers are performing the treatment, they should extend their arms, and gently touch each other's elbows when extending them so that they do not move as much during the motion; then turn your arm in any direction while holding onto the elbow of one hand, until it returns. And once back to its place, you should apply a soothing ointment with fine feathers.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	 The sentence is translated as: "The firm holding of the limb and loosening it when necessary, until it moves freely with all its joints loose.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 After removing the joint and it stops moving from being wet or rubbed hard, if you put grease on its skin and then leave it alone for one night, afterwards soak in hot water, after that remove the grease, and then again soak in warm water, repeat this process three times until it is cured; but if you see any swelling due to moist fur, squeeze gently with a damp cloth while restraining from rubbing.
li dislocation de la main	 The translation for "dislocation of the hand" is
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 The sentence translated to: "The dislocation of the hand is loose and moves freely more than any other joint; so it must be gently pulled back into its place immediately when it becomes dislocated, unless swelling occurs.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And when you place the hand on top of a table and extend it towards your face, while looking at each finger individually to ensure that everything is in its correct position and aligned well with the jointure; if there are any movements or deviations from this alignment, it would be advisable for you to look closely whether it's alright at one end. At that point gently stretch out and remove it from the table using both hands simultaneously.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of your hand, then place it on top with its palm facing upwards towards the table, and carefully inspect the position of each finger to ensure everything is aligned correctly; if there are any movements or deviations from this alignment, you would need to look closely whether it's alright. At that point gently stretch out and remove both hands simultaneously while keeping your hand placed on top of the table.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 And now that it is well in its position, you should gently stretch out and remove both hands simultaneously while keeping your hand placed on top of the table; if there are any movements or deviations from this alignment, continue to look closely whether everything is alright.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 "If he cannot endure the pain and you do not place it back in position after some time has passed, if the joint is torn; then there is no other way but to restrain with a fire cure so that the case may be dealt with.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 "And when the hand is in place as we have said, and you tighten it with a hemostat and let go after some time, then loosen it gently.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If he cannot move well and is not in pain if the flame is applied very gently.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 The dislocation of both hands must be corrected
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 "The dislocation of both hands must be corrected in a certain order: first to the back of the palm or belly, and then towards the joints from there, hold tight so they do not move until you can get them to move; but loosen it when necessary as we have said before.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 "Disregarding the initial joint movement
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the elbow dislocation occurs or is dislocated frequently, without treatment it will lead to death as there are no cures available
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the sign that it is about to occur, one can sense a dull pain and cannot hold onto the limb; repeatedly dislocated in different parts of the body, like lower back; if there is no treatment or recovery available, it will come from childhood.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those who come from injury or blows or similar things will resort to old-fashioned treatments with big words, but I have already stated that these methods are useless and I provide alternative remedies in different ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that for the dislocation occurring in front of one's feet, there is no remedy or cure; and similarly those who come directly to the lower costal area cannot be cured unless it comes from behind as mentioned earlier; and they extend their limbs, some towards the head and others towards the chest, among the two groups; and all must be held firmly while recovering.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 "If the cure does not work after three strokes of a long cane and you have finished with it, then put the environment back into its place on top of the board; and put your eyes next to the other end of the board, press firmly while turning until they straighten up by themselves.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 "Put the first eye next to an arm with a long bone; and between them put another thumb from that arm; and so on for all of the fingers on one hand; then turn it, causing both thumbs or fingers to move together until they are all in place.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is dislocated if they put a plaster with much moisture and then blisters, and the skin of an ear of three millimeters in length that needs to be sewn, if you don't treat the patient immediately there will come the appearance behind the spine from two sides, and care must take into account the dislocation; so this is when the arm opens because it cannot help but have doubt: for fear may bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 The joint of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 The joints of the arm and shoulder only dislocate themselves, they do not come with any other joint; and the joint of the shoulder has four parts: front, back, above, below; more dense in these directions, very low in those behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 Translation: And the knowledge of his dislocations is that when one joint a lame with a sinew, it will be longer and stretch further than the healthy ones; they cannot double their girth in fire; and if the veins are opened up, then the ulcers flare out from beneath.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 Translation: And the sign of that which comes to an end is that there was an accident contrary to these signs before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 Translation: And the sign of that which proceeds to its end is that it stands well on its leg according to completion; in any case, do not double its girth with pain, and if you try before, hold back urine, and swell the veins, and when it came, goes down onto the toe.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 Translation: And the sign of that which proceeds to its end is that it cannot spread its girth, or double, and one leg is more stiff than the other, the veins are softened, and the vein cuts from below come loose on both sides.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 "The members of this dislocation are such that one cannot straighten them out and they remain crooked, without any treatment; it is not advisable to make any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 "In the case of fresh dislocations and when they occur frequently, if you manage to reset them back in place correctly, it relieves stiffness and pain, and straightens the arm from front to back; however, there is no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 "If that doesn't work out as expected and the arm cannot be reset correctly back into place, you must firmly hold both hands with your other hand so they do not move; and after releasing them gently from below their elbows, straighten one at a time to release the pain of the elbow.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This method of stretching is common among us, so dislocations occur when they are pulled or twisted in the wrong direction.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If that is not the case, it's recommended to put on a brace or splint in order to stabilize their shoulder and prevent further dislocation if they are pulled or twisted too much while trying to straighten out their arm/shoulder.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 If that's not the case and you want to prevent further dislocation if their arm/shoulder is pulled or twisted too much while straightening it out, you should apply a strong brace or splint on both of their arms from wrist to elbow and across their chest as well.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 "When dislocations occur, if the joint is injured and as we have mentioned before with someone who has had an injury to one limb, carefully remove it from its socket and position, then place two pins in both sides of the dislocated area near the bone; and apply ice packs over it so that it does not move, until relief.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 "Sure enough, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, then put on the ice pack and press gently as we have mentioned before with someone who has had an injury to one limb.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 "And when the dislocation is in front of it, make sure to straighten the leg gently as we have mentioned before with someone who has had an injury to one limb; then press both hands against the affected area and extend them downward towards the ground.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 "The dislocation must be treated immediately if it occurs, and should not be stretched or lifted off the ground, as this would cause further injury to the limb. If the joint remains dislocated, then you should press down on its joint at a table level, keeping your hands steady so that it does not move while applying pressure. Wait until all four corners of the dislocation have been held and maintained for several seconds or minutes, depending on how long the ligament takes to return to its original position.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 "The dislocation must be treated immediately if it occurs, and should not
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	 "There are three ways to reduce the dislocation: first, gently pressing down on it at its level from above and below, without causing further injury; second, lifting it off the ground while keeping both hands steady and applying pressure downwards towards the dislocated joint; third, pressing down firmly against a table or other flat surface with your palms facing upwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 "The patient is instructed to stretch their leg towards the elbow while keeping their hand on it, in order to ensure proper alignment of the joint and prevent dislocation.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 "As for the limbs, it is not advisable to stretch them excessively during treatment, as we mentioned in the previous paragraph.
de la dislocation dou talon	 "Dislocation of the wrist
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 "The toes are never fully straight or crooked, and they may feel numb.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the limbs should be straightened out gently and held that way until they are no longer sore.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is healed enough, you should gently straighten the affected limb and hold it that way until it returns to its correct position.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 "And when she reaches the end, if she meets resistance or struggles along the way, then let her rest for one more time, two times, three times, and continue to support her until it is resolved.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the patient moves their arm while you are supporting them, continue to support and assist as we have stated previously until they stabilize.
des dois	 "The second sentence does not
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 "When the two are dislocated and it is desired to extend its range of motion as much as possible, this can be a gentle movement.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When the two are dislocated and it is desired to extend its range of motion as much as possible, you should support one side at a time while pressing on the joint with your fingers. Then release after three times and let them rest until they stabilize.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 Pain and dislocation are combined
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a dislocation is accompanied by a wound, and it is restored, often times there are deaths; if one does not heed the advice, they may not be able to move that limb again and will suffer long-term consequences as well as injuries.
Amen	 Amen
