O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 "Oh, dear friends! I have completed this book which is the beginning of medical science and the foundation for its growth, and it has come to an end with all its explanations and through my statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 I had a vision that this book will be completed by another treatise which is part of the art of surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 Because the art of surgery is greatly valued in our region and is esteemed above all things, it may be that no one seeks to learn from its secrets except for the few who have studied anatomy in books.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 Because of this there was an error and a controversy, which caused it to be closed down, and the science had ended.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 I suppose that we should complete the treatise by following its explanation and statement with abbreviation; and include the forms of the application of cautery and other means for surgery along with the arrangement of its declaration and preparation; this way it will be better.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for the reason why no great masters of hands are found among our people, it is the physicians who elongated their studies.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And he who enters into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he counts the bones and veins and nerves and brains themselves, and their nature and their connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and the nerves and the brain itself, its movement and rest, its life and its limbs moving and at rest.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	 And from whom you cannot find the reason for this, also in the art of medicine
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 In the introduction of this book, we tell that who are not acquainted with these matters to be silent if they make an error and do not know it; unless I want many more often than those who engage in this science and then abandon their learning and sense of experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 "The man saw a fool mirror that looked like a face of another woman and tore the arteries from its place, because so much blood was lost between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 "There was another mirror that depicted a vein of the heart and the greatest artery in particular, if broken with it brought blood to one's head within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 "And I had to go through the treatment, which included inspecting the wound and size of the artery, making sure everything was in order.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 "And there was another mirror that prescribed for our land which had broken leg and the accompanying bruise, and the mirrors plain of ignorance restrained the split from healing in all haste as well as preventing it at any point, and left it at the end; and it commanded to not delay healing, and delayed until the leg became whole, head, and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 "I was calling for him to come quickly and untie his leg when I realized that he had dislocated it without any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 "Any injury to a joint is already done and may not heal; the correction cannot continue unless all members are completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 "And also note that if it happened in front of a mirror, then it causes inflammation around the area of injury.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 "And when it is purulent and melancholic, then only a touch with iron should be used if not in that case nothing else will help to cure what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 "For this reason it is important for you to know that the hands are divided into two parts: one part has more danger in many places, and I will show in each of these chapters where there is fear or danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 "For as long as you keep your weapons steady and do not let the fire harmfully touch them while they are inflamed with disease or poison, so that by God's grace you may come to salvation and be whole; leave the contagious diseases of sorrow behind you; and hold fast your weapons against all doubts and fears.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take upon yourself any ill disease, lest you be called a madman.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have read through the third chapter of this treatise.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 The first chapters are about fire cauteries and water cauteries, and the last chapter is dedicated to explaining all necessary details.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 The second chapters are about cutting and piercing wounds, extractions of arrows, and similar things; the chapter is dedicated to explaining all necessary details.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; it orders the most important pieces of advice for those cases, and shapes of injuries.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 It is also necessary that you consider the quality of the help and the degree to which it will be given.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I say that the quality of help and its extent are important words to consider carefully because they imply subtle and complex science as well as secret methods; by doing so you will speak more effectively and agree on this, and those who listen may remember what is said here, for it is lengthy.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 I say that there should be help given to everyone who has any matter; but if they have complications, such as knowing how to handle hot and cold materials separately, then the complications arise from this; for example, knowing how to handle heat and cold materials separately is important.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 In hot and cold materials together there is no help at all given; they said it was great aid, but the other said that caution is not worth much in disease that comes from heat and thirst.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 The patient should not be cured of the heat disease with fire but instead must apply cold remedies to counteract it, lest they cause harm and lead to dry skin that comes from too much warmth.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you purchase clothing for the body and its moisture at high temperatures, you should apply cold water to cool it down
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I give you this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 Because I have tried many times and failed each time.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 And in all ways, those who have practiced it and are skilled at using this treatise on cauterization and the diversity of skin types among people and their causes for illnesses and treatments for cold and wet conditions; as well as the others, we don't share our doubts or fears about any other diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And they assemble themselves and agree on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And you must know
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 The procedure is simple, and it only occurs in the member that is injured, and does not spread to other members
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The healing medicines come to another member by swelling up, and cause the arrival of diseases of great pain and great injury; but due to its high strength and nature, it does not happen if there is no excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	 I found it through experiment and the long time of service and study that I have put in to its art, and by this I am excused for the length of my words, as I do not wish you to know the secret which is written down, nor the quality of the horse, but only what troubles the body if spoken about; so consider it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And note, dear reader, to have them all done as instructed
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And I say that cautery can be beneficial in all cases, since the wounds caused by it heal quickly and effectively without suffering great harm or pain to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 And do not worry if you are unsure of how the process works; as cautery is not a cure but rather a treatment that soothes and cleanses the humors causing pain, and speeds healing quickly while leaving the complexion unaffected for its own sake and to preserve beauty in old age.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	 And you should know that the disease will not come back as long as the complexion is good and the illness itself has been cured; and all excess things are taken away with the cautery, so that there is no more pain or swelling; but it does take time.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 "And people do not hear about cauterization being used in medicine anymore, but they still believe that cauterization is valuable after medicine, while their intentions are false, and so the people who practice medicine using our methods of treatment for any disease have no value when we administer our cautery, as it should.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 "However, after realizing that cauterization is used in medicine, they do not follow the intentions of those who practice medicine anymore.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 "The previous statement said that the use of gold as an instrument is better than iron, and they said that because of its quality and purity; however, it was not true to see since I tried it myself and found out that it's only worth seeing in some homes; but gold cautery is better than iron if you follow what they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 "And whenever you strike with a hammer, do not let it cool down as soon as the heat is applied, and if it gets too hot; if they ignite.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 "For this reason we use our fire cure tools in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 Or you have ordered the first chapter to be read more slowly, so that it may be easier to find its meaning.
dou cautere olivaire	 "olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 "The cautery of the liver is painful and cold, due to one disease called 'soda', and by the cause of many humors arising from two veins, and from ears, and through much pain in limbs and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from a chill as paralysis, stroke, and similar maladies.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be trimmed by a soothing ointment applied three or four times, depending on what suits you and your taste and habit for the pain to subside; and then reapply the salve over the sore part.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 Then hold it between your hands and place his hand on top of yours. Afterwards, put the root of your thumb over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and if he cries out in pain please extinguish this cautery called "olive oil," as to what form it is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place it on the left side of your body, and hold tightly with each passing moment until you see small signs that he is in pain; after a short while, if there are no signs, then please extinguish this cautery as I have instructed you before. Afterwards, remove one piece at a time from his hand, and apply moist cotton to it gently, and place on the left side of your body. After a while, leave it for three days, after which you should cover it with soft cotton wool, and leave in its place until he stops bleeding.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	 And they said, "The more inflamed the wound is, the more pus emerges; therefore seek help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And they said none of these that one should apply the cautery so much that part of the bone is burnt, and then seek healing for what was burned from the bone, or both.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 And they said another that one should apply the cautery so much, and burn it so hard as to destroy part of the bone outside like a woman puts it in her face because heat makes humors flow out; and you must let the wound heal long before, after which you should cure and sew.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 These two ways of cauterization seem to be bones in every way, and I fear that I may leave it; because dislocations are often caused by continuous solutions from nature, as we have experienced with our other members; and especially when the dislocation is weak by nature, and its first sign of cautery is more healing and soothing for me, and so does this use come into play.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 "The first joint has moved out of its place
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 "As the pain worsens and lingers on, then apply ice packs and ointments which are known as 'chois', to soothe the pain and inflammation of the joint; also use fire cautery like we mentioned earlier.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 "If the dislocated joint is very stiff and not too cold either, then apply fire cautery like we mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 "After applying fire cautery to the joint's surface like we mentioned earlier, apply the 'vasselz' cautery; and also gently hold your hand so that you do not touch the bone; this will cause less pain than other types of cauterization, I will speak more on this later. It is important that the cauterization tools are more subtle than those used for small cuts, as they should be like:
dou cautere dou chief	 The first sentence translates to "the fire cautery.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 When one part of the body comes with great pain and extends to the entire illness, the blisters are drawn out by various medicines; everything else that I have mentioned in the division of diseases, and whatever may come, will not profit for those who do not perform cauterization according to this method, it is known as medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 The cauterization of medicine is that you pierce a hole with twelve points and then hold it tight for twelve hours or more until the pain ceases, at which time let go gently and apply the dressing within two or three days; thereafter, put on a plaster to cover as much as possible.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 After the healing has been cured, and if you find that you have used some of the remedies mentioned in my previous writings on curing burning illnesses.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery is as described.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 "Fire it up!
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And it is called 'closed' because when the incision is made in a circle or oval shape there will be less bleeding and the patient feels less pain, as well as having their hand held tight to prevent movement of the arm; and once done gently hold your hand steady while applying pressure lightly to stop any remaining bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 After cleaning with warm water and cotton, put it on the wound gently but firmly; then apply warm compress until it is dry; and if you decide to cauterize this burn using a 'cultellare' type cautery, which should be applied at the tip of it, make sure not to touch any nearby arteries that are not yet cut.
de emigraine	 evacuation
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 When you cure an inflammation as we have explained before in divisions of diseases, and do not neglect, observe that the cautery is called "cultellar" when it is applied evenly; and if someone pulls at its base once or twice, hold steady so they cannot move until it grows.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And if you see that the cauteries are not effective for this disease and the wounds are worsening, then apply the cautery as we have described before to treat the plague until it is cured; or if you see, administer the artery cautery along with the one having two handles; and these cauteries will be better than those and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 Of pain from the ears of hearing loss
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When the ear comes to pain from cold, and one applies remedies of solutions and other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, the pains cease, unless there is a fire therapy that is called "pins," where it forms like this.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the pin has been removed from the ear, if both ears are affected, and they hold on tightly to pain until one of them is pulled gently away; after curing it as much as it can be treated.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 Torture that must be cured with fire therapy is different from those that come from bleeding and swelling of the nose, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases; and do not apply any fire treatment similar to what comes out of sores and pus discharge nostrils.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 When you cure this torture by using three needles, one in the root of the ear and another above the temple to the level two lines below it, apply the third needle on the clean part of the ear.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And there is the same cauterizing procedure mentioned earlier, but it's a bit more subtle and suitable to use needles that are slightly larger after having cured as previously described, until they are in place.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 When apoplexy occurs and it is cured as mentioned earlier, the patient may not benefit from it, causing no fever to occur after having had four needles: two on both ears, one at the root of the ear, another in the area called "vein" (as mentioned earlier), and the final one on the esophagus. Alternatively, cure it as mentioned previously.
de litargie	 Of concern
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 This disease can be cured by giving the patient large and diverse hair pills, after which all the symptoms of the disease disappear completely, except for one small symptom that remains in the head, where a needle is inserted to treat the ulcers; this is how the cure works: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If you are well then good, and if not it is the third cure that we do: after cutting off one large ulcer, between each of two larger ulcers, in which we perform a cautery; so also for those who call us 'olive tree', as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	 Of cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 It is important that the ulcers are free of all and everything we have mentioned before; after removing one large ulcer, then perform a cautery for each of two larger ones, in between which you do the third cure: you perform four cauteries on either side of both elbows, so also if there is more healing needed, and the wounds become moist and inflamed, and the illness worsens, then you perform four cauteries across both sides; until as long as the patient's fever subsides, and gently hold her hand. After curing, until it is cured, and if 'olive tree' is called for by our name that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	 of the elbow
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The elbow joints should not be treated with fire until they are inflamed, and it is advisable first to massage the area around them and other treatments as mentioned in the previous paragraph regarding large and swollen tendons of the arm.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if someone does not let go easily (i.e., if the patient resists), they should gargle and chew some bones to help soothe the pain; after that, you should apply the fire treatment as described earlier, on the elbow, the wrist, and all joints of the arm; and if there are still large and swollen tendons, then apply olive oil according to the method mentioned before.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the tendons are inflamed, you should apply the fire treatment gently in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 For the melancholic's ailment, apply the same cautery that we have described to those paralyzed by paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And when the cause of melancholy is declining with melancholy, and the body's hair becomes moist, causing it to become dizzy as if spinning around; this may occur due to the division taking place within.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the affected area: after cutting off the big hair, and making it curl as you circle it if you tie it up tightly, then the hairs should be held steady without moving until they grow; afterward present the healing oil onto them gently, and make sure to rub the burned area frequently with a cold oil every week, no matter how sane he is.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 "You shall burn through by piercing it more often than not.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 The manner of cautery includes the hair, and then it is to be applied with a fine powder and fat.
de l’awe des eulz	 from the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When the first signs of doubt and fear occur in the beginning of treatment, as soon as blood is lost or there is excessive bleeding, and if the wound worsens over time, it must be treated more often.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 After the patient has been instructed to rest his head, and a second cautery is applied to the other temples in order to close them together; then all the cauteries are applied to the veins and arteries that were mentioned earlier, so that they may heal according to their size and width of temple; and be aware of any bleeding, if too much bleeding occurs, if necessary.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 "I will teach you how to extract arteries and make incisions in the cautery, so that you may hold it steady; but never do any harm to yourself or others.
dou cors des larmes	 both arms
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 When the veins of the eyes are old and accustomed to their veins, or when you find them damaged from arteries that appear weak, then remove both with incisions; if there is another need for it, do the cautery immediately on the small one above the eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 two arms of tears by removing the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 When you follow the instructions that we've given in the previous division and it doesn't benefit me at all, after removing the eye from the forehead, do the cautery on the upper eyelid as well; and also perform two cauteries which is called "clavicula" over the eyebrows just slightly above the eyes; and watch for any arteries that you may miss.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this form of cautery is called "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery that is called "olivary":
de coi ci est li forme:	 This form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if you see two blisters on the same finger that are connected together like twin blisters, do not let go of your hand until all three parts of the paper have been burned off according to the manner I said:
dou poil qui point l’oil	 two hairs that touch oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 There is no time when the hairs of oil have been converted to powder and prick at the oil, one burns it off according to the hot method or applies an ardent medicine:
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow:
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When the hairs are born and equal in length, then apply a paste of flour and vinegar to the skin; afterwards shave off the cautery as soon as it appears.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the cautery to the body, you should repeatedly wash it off with warm water until it is completely washed away. Afterwards, shave off any remaining paste from the skin and hair, making sure not to leave any behind.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And after the hairs and paper have been softened in this way, if you do not notice any remaining paste on the skin or hair, then remove it completely from both.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The cautery procedure is to instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then shape a form of a horsehair brush; apply French soap and warm water; mix well together; and apply gently if it does not cool down, while holding the shape as you did with the horsehair brush. If they prick at their base, hold them steady so that they don't move until they grow.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 After completing this procedure for a prolonged period of time if the patient still experiences pain then medical attention should be sought
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the bleeding has stopped if you see that it is still light as before due to heat or injury and it is severe then seek medical attention immediately
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 This sentence translates to: "If the medicine you take or did not heal, as long as your wounds are raw and tender, and they are bandaged properly; then apply cold compresses on them until their cuts have stopped bleeding, after curing the first wound that was mentioned earlier.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 This sentence translates to: "And it is better if you treat your wounds properly with great care, so that they do not become infected.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hairs prick it with oil, if you start medicine for that one who is bleeding properly from a clean paper as you have done before; after treatment until he is healed, and this is how the feather grows.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And such that the eyes of men are diverse in size and form according to which it is you who determine them; and there should not be another way for him who has learned this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 cure for fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When curing a fistula as we have mentioned in previous lines of treatment, and your treatments are not effective, it is advisable to perform the cautery in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Instruct the patient to put his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move at all, or even slightly; after which apply wet gauze soaked in vinegar or rose water onto the wound; after cautery is applied: and hold tightly on the head so as to prevent movement until healing occurs.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 After the fistula has been perforated and treated with heat, and if it is closed, then apply pressure to seal the wound, after applying the cautery keep your hand tight over the part of the nose that was burned so as not to touch any other parts of the body with oil; and apply the cautery on the fat in the oil area and smear.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 At the beginning of the cautery procedure for the eye, it would do well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, if you still wish to proceed with the cautery once more and it helps, then let there be three times of rinsing after each incision as much as possible, ensuring that the eye does not move while it is being cleansed; thereafter, apply corrosive medicine until the eye is healed; and according to this, go back to your surgeon.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a manner of fistula cautery which none of them knew before.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Cauterizing a fistula and removing the opening; thereafter put in the bandage with the following subtle application
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 And they apply one or two times of oil to the fistula opening; and hold tightly with their hand so that the eyes do not move while holding it fast; thereafter apply oil to a small bandage inside, which will go into the fistula passage if applied well; and when the fistula is healed, then remove this bandaging material.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if you prick at their base
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, administer a numbing agent to the area and bring the fistula back into place as soon as possible.
des crevaices en levres	 incisions
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 There are often multiple cuts in a vein that are referred to as "hairs," and additionally at birth.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 After cutting these veins according to what we have said in sections, and after treating them well but not excessively with a narrow cut like this one
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the patient will be treated constantly until it is completely healed, after the treatment of each vein as soon as they are finished healing.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the abscess's
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 The abscess can occur at the root of a vein or anywhere else on the body, if it occurs in the roots of teeth after injury and treatment but not cured, then you must look for a cure within your medical text; otherwise, do nothing more than observe its symptoms as described above.
dou movement des dens	 movement of the limbs
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 When veins are softened by moisture and the limb moves, you give them a treatment with medicines. You put an ointment on the burn in such a manner that it comes off at once after applying to the base of the tooth; afterwards rinse away the cautery according to your will. Afterwards apply medicine to close up the mouth sore, wait for some time and then heal quickly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in that way you make the limbs stop moving if they are softened by moisture and the veins stiffen up
de la dolor des dens	 from the pain of the limbs
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 When pain from the limbs comes due to cold or heat and medicines cannot help it, then apply the fire cautery first and the burn cautery afterwards.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 For the fire cure, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold steady so that they don't move until they grow
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 For the fire cure, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold steady so that they don't move until they grow
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is important that the mouth hairs are removed by burning during the application of the cure, and then the root will be done.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And do what you please with it, according to your desire; that is how long the hair should grow.
des scrophules	 eyebrows
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the eyebrows are cold and dry, it is applied regularly with medicinal oil to stimulate hair growth, after which a second cautery may be performed on the opposite side of the eyebrow in order to ensure even growth; if this fails due to excessive itching then you should apply pressure bandages until the rash subsides.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the skin?
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When moisture enters the nostrils and especially when it causes cold complexion, then you should first apply soothing medicines to the nasal passages; after performing a cautery on the root of the tongue, make sure not to move your tongue at all for some time afterwards.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the fire cautery to a joint at the top of the arm and calling it a "clavicle", if the cauterization is successful, hold still as long as you can so that you do not move until your hair grows.
de la toust	 from the neck
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 When all the bones and muscles are frostbitten, causing numbness in their extremities, perform the fire cautery on the finger joints to alleviate the pain associated with this condition, as well as another cautery between the fingers; if a clavicle-like appearance is present, perform both types of cauterization.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see this, perform the fire cautery on the points of the cauterization called "points" where the form is present in the ear disease, or elsewhere as needed.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing it according to what is shown here, and perform the third cautery where this form exists
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because they are more severe, I will make three attempts to cure them
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the shoulder joint dislocates due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 After rubbing the skin on both sides and around it with a towel, gently press down on where you feel numbness in your hand. If there is swelling after this procedure, then proceed with caution as described below
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 And cauterize the towel as soon as it touches your skin on that side, and there will be four cauterizations together. And if you make a cautery with the cautery that has three needles, then there are six cauteries; and hold the nerve according to its subtlety by tightening the cautery that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And once dislocated at this time of nerve
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After applying the heat compress, apply a cold compress to ease tension on the limb until it is comfortable
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If dislocated, you should apply a cold compress to ease tension on the affected limb and then reapply heat as needed for a broken bone or other pain
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 The joint is reset, and it relieves moisture and soothes the muscles.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When the stomach is full of cold and moisture, it causes shivering and increases heartburns; and the usual methods for treatment are not effective, until the muscles of the abdomen are supported with its back, extending its legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After applying the third compress to each cheek at equal intervals of two, for all three compresses across both cheeks so that there is space between one and another when they are joined together; then apply a fourth compress in the shape as described.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you see the fire treatment of a large size and its severity, then treat it by puncturing and holding onto the stomach lining. Point according to the extent that you have seen in it; and then apply the treatment for all ulcers which are called "boils".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the illness we had previously experienced, as long as they are healthy
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver comes with pain from fruit and moisture, as long as it is still attached to its natural place; and the ulcers are cured according to this form and size and quantity of the liver, so that they may not return. And if he cannot do so, go gently, extend his legs, lean on his elbows; and this is how
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if you are to cauterize these small cuts and sew them neatly, be careful not to cut too much as it will hurt all over the body; so that you do not make a mistake because your hand is in a slight trembling spot, where there are many fine hairs to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When you are cauterizing the abdomen and wonder whether it is in fat or flesh: if it is in fat, there will be great pain that doesn't subside; but if it is in flesh, it causes no more pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this cure is applied to the eyes, if it is desired that the eyelashes should be shaved off, and then determine whether the eye or eyelid is affected, and then shave the cautery which is near the root of the lashes.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 Cauterize the cuts until they are all healed, and after the cure is done as with the wounds, then be sure not to use any cautery on anyone who has not studied long in the art of medicine, or else these diseases will never come back again.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 "And when you really try it, everything seems to indicate leaving it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 several
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 The previous statement advises to perform multiple fire cauterizations on the roots of the tongue, in this manner: take one root of the tongue that is long enough and dried out so it's thick and long like your finger; then anoint with oil and apply fire to it between the forceps and col, and also perform a cautery between the fifth and sixth centimeters, moving downward slightly; perform a cauterization on the esophagus at the base of the tongue as well, and also perform one between two teeth at the back. Do not squeeze your hand tightly while smelling it; instead, do this exactly as you did before.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And they said that no one should use fire for curing sores or burns, and to apply it between the lips as long as it reaches the mouth's base; and if there is pain, just like we have mentioned in the previous example.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But with this ointment it is fear or the sores die now, or a fistula comes and cannot be healed
de la mice	 of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When curing the disease of the mice from what we have said about various treatments, and it does not work at all unless you use the third method of fire which is beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 One way is to perform three cuts on the length of the furrow, according to how much fur you have; another way is to shave down the furrow according to its size and shape as mentioned before, do not apply too much pressure to all parts of it, but let only part of it touch the base of sores or abscesses; a third method is to shave back the furrow where the abscess came from, if there are many sores coming out from that place, then shave back according to its length and width.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After the second ones are inflamed on both sides, then apply the fire cure and wait for it to heal completely. And if you see any blisters from the cautery, then remove them as soon as possible.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment with long tongs has been applied and it is evident that another dose of treatment will be necessary.
de ydropisie	 excision
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 The cautery should not be applied to the eyelid because it is done in this manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you apply the cures as we have said in sections, and your cure is not working, make sure that you perform four more heat treatments on the face, abdomen, liver, gallbladder, back to spine, buttocks, and finally head; ensure all burns are well covered by a cloth.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 After leaving the cautery, let it sit for a long time and then gently apply the treatment to the sore after the cautery; and afterwards, healing will occur, and they will gather the intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 The form of cautery for the belly or breast should be as shown on the right side here. And it may also go to the back and is applied where it lies in front of us.
de l’enfleure des piez	 To remove sores
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the veins are inflamed in someone who is prone to bleeding from them, it is advisable for you to cauterize between the auricular and annular points with a cautery, being gentle as you hold it down with your hand
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter me too quickly; if the bleeding is severe, then burn them according to this shape.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After doing the two legs with cautery at their cutting edge points; and it may be done on one leg in front of you and the other behind as shown below; let them sit for a long time while curing, until all wounds are cured; after curing the others that we have spoken of.
de la menoison	 of the shoulder
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 Abdominal pain comes from cold or moisture, while the stomach and intestines are inflamed, and cannot be treated with usual remedies; you see the patient suffering greatly and being very upset, if one applies the gastric fire cure as mentioned earlier, or the circulatory one; and II fire cures for the subtle veins in all parts of the body.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 If you see the patient with abundant moisture and pain, if one applies fire on the fingertip, or on each eyelid, then apply two fire cures to the stomach; for this treatment is beneficial when it has some effect.
de la cure des emorroydes	 The cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When hemorrhoids are severe or multiple, and old and filled with cold and moist fluids, they cannot be cured as we have described in divisions, unless you apply the following treatments: III on spine at both ends to draw them out steadily over time, I cure of vein II do; also if one thinks the stomach is chilled, and their flesh seizes up, and sees swelling from the face, then apply the stomach fire treatment like it is mentioned before, or another for liver, gallbladder, and intestines.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wound as much as possible
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 The healing process, also known as "the lul.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 When you apply the "the lul," if a fire treatment is required and not done so before applying it, then apply it as much as possible until after its application, at which point let your hand stay still to prevent any movement; afterwards continue treating wounds as long as they are healed, or else use additional treatments such as cautery for severe cases.
de plaie mal curee	 A wound that is not healing properly
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 If the wounds do not respond to treatment and are causing illness that cannot be cured through cautery, then we will discuss its nature in our next chapter, as this may require additional treatments
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If no fistula comes out and is inflamed and infected with corrupted fluids, then try to gently squeeze it until pus pours out and the tent remains tight as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After the fire has been applied and the blisters are broken according to how much they were pressed in, it continues until the sores that have formed are fully healed or three times if necessary. And be sure not to damage the nerves as well
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 It should be applied to the chest and abdomen as well, and not perform any more than is necessary in one or two days, unless otherwise stated by a doctor; after it has been applied until all sores are healed completely; and if they are not completely healed, repeat three times.
de la maladie des reins	 kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 When pain arises from the stomach and large intestines, it is important to apply a fire treatment on both sides of the abdominal incision where we have previously mentioned this; and if necessary, additional treatments should be performed in between as well
de la vessie	 of
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 When the bladder is weak and easily burst due to fruitiness and moisture, if it holds urine there, when applying fire cautery in that part of the body between the thighs where they prick with a needle, either one burns or both burn together; but if on the buttocks then apply cautery separately as described.
de la marris	 From marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 When the marriage is cold and moist, causing it to be uncomfortable to conceive, flowers become corrupted and their terms expire early; when they come, if they cause great pain: then you should apply three fire cauteries as mentioned earlier for the bladder, along with two cauteries on the buttocks, and one cautery on each arm.
de la hainche	 From chastity
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 When the moisture inside the vein swells up and prevents it from its place, causing misalignment of the limb, which causes great pain and injury to the patient. To treat such dislocations, you should cauterize the abscess at the base of the vein as well.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the cauterization does not take place immediately or is repeated multiple times, then you should perform a third cautery on the large vein and apply it similarly to all other cuts, curing as long as it stays intact.
de la dolor de la hainche	 From the pain of the limb
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 When pain arises in the vein of the limb and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the veins are treated as we have said in division and treatment do not matter, and illness begins: when it should be that you cleanse the large humor from fat particles or other similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After performing the cautery; and doing it according to this manner as well - you must know how to put together medicines that are fiery
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 The different ways to do the cautery are like this - you should perform it according to three methods. One method is cauterizing the base of the artery with three triangular flames; another way is to cauterize deeply and widely, so that every cautery has its own depth compared to a second one, in order not to burn olive leaves as well; there should never be any cautery performed during an abscess opening because it's done according to this method.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you see that the cautery should be done in a circular manner as we mentioned earlier regarding the dislocation of the arm; but do it in such a way that the circles cover all the area and have all the edges covered too.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is how it's done in surgery, when the pain persists at the incision site, and cannot be controlled by just using the wrist or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the pain persists at both the elbow and the knee joint, then he is instructed to perform a second fire application on the inner part of the upper arm or shoulder; so that they can control the pain, by cutting into it.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if the pain continues to spread towards the shoulder joint, then they perform a second application of fire on the inner part of the upper arm or shoulder; so that it can control and reduce any pain by cutting into it deeply without causing harm to the major arteries and veins.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 "And I myself have experienced many who underwent cauterization on their shoulder, and it let the hairs grow until the leg was completely shaved, and pierced them so, and they were burned up to that point.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly incision which led to death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 The pain was in two parts that were both cauterized separately according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wound said in the manner of cauterizing the skin with fire, by either touching it and feeling its warmth as one would touch a burning piece of steel, or slightly less so, and through cuts made between them and along each other at intervals like the points on the end of a needle; and they were made in two parts, and also flat, and it was done well.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "In the meantime, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even while applying fire cautery ointment over them, then apply it gently on the base of the abscess sore, turning towards the sun's direction; thereafter, perform a burn healing procedure once after removing the third blister, allowing the wound to heal completely.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 "Albucasim says that our use of fire cautery should be avoided due to its potential harm, and it is best to do so only when necessary; moreover, the treatment with fire cauteries often causes pain, and therefore where there is pain.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 "The cauteries of medicine are such that you should draw the instrument close to where it ends by its side and either burn or cut with a sharp knife along an edge until it is long enough; after doing this for every part, they should be applied together in one direction.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After wrapping the bandage tightly around his arm at the elbow joint, press your hand against it; after that, put another bandage around the elbow itself and let it rest for a while to cool down and reduce swelling in the arm.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For the fire cautery, when the incisions hurt too much, gently hold your hand with a tool and remove the bandage gently so that the wound is moist and let it rest for three hours; after this, put tight bandages over it as long as the blackened part of the wound is still red.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain extends to the shoulder or leg, use a tool that is warm and apply it as you did with the bandage earlier; this method of fire cautery can be used for treating other types of wounds in addition to skin injuries.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Break it gently and crush all together, then put into new pots
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 When it pierces with one blow that could enter the other; and puts into a new pot those that were well beaten, then takes out of the first pot all the ashes, and separates them by sifting through chaff or pounding in another pot until you have taken away what is necessary for your hand's use.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And when it comes to burns and wounds other than those that are cauterized with these remedies as mentioned before, they should be treated in the following manner: apply vinegar or cardamoms mixed with honey and ashes; and bind them with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 It tells of a remedy that someone had tried for the pain in the stomach and veins; he said there was no other remedy, and when it was done once, they were washed as instructed afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And it proceeds in this manner that you press gently with a fresh and dry cloth, and smear the bruise with some fat or grease, and place on the arm, shoulder, and leg where the pain is located, and also leave for three hours by counting from when they no longer feel the sharpness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then let them enter into a hot bath until their nerves are calmed and relaxed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Do not use such fire cauteries after the evacuation of wounds.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 Dizziness occurs when a sciatic nerve is cauterized from injury, and should be treated with caution.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take a thread soaked in oil, and place it between the finger that is closer to your thumb and the one closest to your index finger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After a long and thorough cleansing, set the fire to it as long as it is charcoal, then lay on wool, leaving it until it is done. And repeat this process again, not ceasing until you sense that it is well-cooked throughly, and your pain has ceased; and these ways of cautery are called 'cautery of fire'.
de la dolor dou dos	 from the two pains
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, whether by sprain or impact, or from excessive cold evacuation, or from exposure of cold material, none of these pains is worth cauterizing because one who has just suffered from exposure to cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 It is advisable after this that the patient avoid taking fat pills or other such things; if they feel pain at their back, three lines should be used to hold it steady and in one line V cauterize as much as possible according to necessity and quantity of suffering; and so cauterization is performed according to the cautery called 'spurs'.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 Many times this disease comes to children, and the signs of its onset are that it has a sudden onset when they arise, and pain; and you see in the lower part of their face two red areas and in us an appearance which comes with other bruises
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this and it seems to be cured after cautery for the cautery of the flesh according to that form
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If only part of the skin is treated with the red cauterization
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see that cautery on an area of skin for two or three lines and have pins pressed to one another's sides.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After the treatment as much as it is sane according to what we have said, and be sure not to administer any cautery in excess which may cause nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	 of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 When joints are inflamed due to moisture in any limb of the body, and when pain comes with swelling, you must apply pressure firmly but gently; if it is caused by coldness or lack of treatment, they cannot be cured using cauteries alone. In such cases, use cauteries only as a last resort:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 If you prick at its base, apply the cautery over it.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 If the pain continues and it occurs frequently in various joints, or if you have more than one joint, apply a total cautery to all of them. And do not keep your hand still longer than necessary, until both ends of the vein heal.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 If the pain continues and on either side, apply the cautery as we have instructed in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 "And if there is no pain at all when pricking the skin with two needles in two lines, and if it remains without pain after that, then prick each joint and apply pressure to stop bleeding.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 "If you apply pressure and the bleeding stops, only then will you have God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 "from going out of order
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 "When the dislocation occurs in joints, and the limbs become crooked and it becomes painful. After you have treated the wound with oil, make the dislocated arm lie flat on its back between your hands, hold it there until both sides are healed, and then roll it onto its side; and if it is on the lower limb, do this to one of them, for all signs point in that direction.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 While being blunt and sharp he feels pain all over his body
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then tighten the muscles around the arm and hold them steady so they do not move back towards the vein until healing is complete. Also apply the fire cautery to all of his hands, excepting only the thumb and little finger, then reset the dislocation if it occurs again at any time while performing the cautery procedure; and beware gently that the bones may not break or cause further harm as a result of this treatment
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And ensure that when you are performing the cautery procedure, your efforts will be in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And make sure the cautery on children is done gently according to their size, and for adults it should be large enough to cause frostbite; after curing other wounds as soon as they are healed, and extract arrows if there's an injury; and ensure that his limbs remain still until the pain subsides; also ensure that he rests comfortably while healing.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 After X days, when he wants to rise, he will be given a well-made bandage and change it every other day; and rest for good after that, as long as you work slowly and endure excessive thirst from drinking too much water, and overheating the body very high. And if he does this training completely right then his health will be perfect
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 After the treatment is over
de la routure dou ventre	 of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When sutures come out and are removed, the patient should be subjected to a third cautery at specific points.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 First sew up the opening and place one line along the length of the incision; then another on the other side, cover it with cautery cloth all around
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But first things first
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 The first thing to do is treat any injuries or pain that may already exist in
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain occurs in any member, whether from a scratch or a wound, and the pain continues to grow longer, so that cautery is recommended, and it is called a 'point', either cauterize the area thoroughly with a point of cautery such as those used for hemorrhoids, or cauterize smaller areas according to their length and thinness and tightness and weakness and location of the torcs and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 After the first cautery is done well; when you have named it, start another cautery over that one, as custom is to do so for each member until all wounds are cauterized.
de meselerie	 The meselary
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The meshes are often treated with a cautery by great help, and most especially when disease comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 "Prepare the cautery tool and begin treatment as previously discussed in the previous chapter, ensuring that it is applied correctly at each point to avoid corruption spreading throughout the body. First cauterize the nose with a new needle, then cauterize both corners of the eye towards the forehead ending on the eyebrows; and after, cauterize the ears next to the head; lastly, apply cautery to the neck between the eyes so that the tool is placed at its proper location.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 "The bleeding should be sparse and obvious if you are using the correct cautery tools as mentioned in the previous chapter. Cauterize each of the areas listed below separately: First cauterize both nostrils; then cauterize the inside corners of the eyes towards the nose, and lastly cauterize between the ears to prevent blood from seeping into them.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And when more the fire cure is done, it brings relief and comfort to him, because the sores are now healed up
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 It's important for the fire cure to be both large and small depending on the size of the body parts and joints, as you will find this in various different ways.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the ear with flour and honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When a blister appears on any part of the body and is cured with medicines, oils, and bandages, but if it continues to appear even after these treatments are applied, then cautery should be done on that particular part of the body depending on its size; and also cautery must be performed periodically as needed for healing.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And once the cautery is done on the head, hands, feet and back of the limb, when the blister disappears from the part where it appeared; and whenever any member or issue moves around the body, then it should be cauterized again; because there are no members or issues that move their limbs independently.
de albaras	 Of arrows
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The disease called "albaras" is severe and affects the liver, so any attempt at treatment with fire cautery is of no value, except for applying it directly to the skin of the affected area while holding tightly on its base as long as it burns steadily, then treating the wounds in a similar manner.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 Treatment for an abscess by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a chancre appears at the beginning of it, you should arrest its growth if a fire cautery is performed around it completely.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And every way they say that fire cautery should be applied to the area of the chancre; and every way it seems like a bad thing because I believe it is not healing and causes more harm, and I do not want any further treatments unless necessary.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 of the arm cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 Those with the ailment called "adubelati" have long periods of illness or suffering due to excess mucus, weakness and pain as they grow older (i.e., too frail); so you must wait until the fire is applied gently across many petis cauteries before pricking; after that leave it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 It will worsen.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 If you prick all the cauteries at once, if your fire is too strong:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 While applying the cautery to "adubelati" patients while holding steady their eyes until they feel the heat; keep them in that position as long as you continue cauterizing, and do it gently enough so the flow of mucus remains normal.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure has been applied perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The patient is instructed to let their hairs grow long and even for the
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way to describe this ailment is that it "corrodes," and nothing more than a wasting away of limbs because they lose the strength in their legs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this ailment in someone whose whole body is on fire, after cauterizing the affected area gently and thoroughly until all the corruption has been eradicated, there will be nothing left of what was corrupt; only that which was not corrupted will remain.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and keep the affected area cauterized with oil until all the burns are healed, and any remaining corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying the remedy to the burnt areas on top of the charcoal powder.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days healthy charcoal does not appear, that's fine; and if not, continue to apply the cautery only on the areas that are still corrupt.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this cautery is no use in place of fire treatment; but all cautery is more great help and I have already mentioned the cure of medicine in dividing: take what you have mastered.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 hairs that come to a point
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens when the points of those hairs come off that there is a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it's a big thing that makes you bleed.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 The cautery for this disease follows two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know the fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Fire cautery is to sear with a burning iron until it penetrates all the way through, and hold your hand tight so that it does not move as long as it burns; after that, release slowly from the base of the arrow, turning your hand completely around the arrow while it grows, and leave the fire on for three nights thereafter.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Prevent dislocation by keeping the joint straight as much as possible.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 "Apply the hot iron treatment with a stick of iron or wire, and place it at the base of the nail. The hot iron will burn off warts in one hour, then leave it on for another hour to remove all root growth.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 "After the hot iron treatment has been applied and removed as instructed, continue to apply heat on those affected areas until they heal.
li cure dou trembler	 "The patient should not tremble
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 "If someone shivers from cold or feverish chills or other reasons, it is advised to apply a hot towel between the armpits and stomach with an olive oil-based cautery to stop shivering and restore health.
des pustules puans	 "The lesions are oozing
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 No pus can be found anywhere on the body except for those on the skin, which come from corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary when the lesions appear to perform a fire cautery on the head of the pimple; or with a fine needle into its base, or using a capillary cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And whenever you perform a cautery at the outset when they appear, in this manner and it does not remove all the pus that comes out, but causes damage to healthy tissues, but it is necessary that this be done after evacuating the wound.
quant li artere est copee	 When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 Many times occur great amounts of blood from the artery that has been cut near or at the wound coming from elsewhere, such as in cutting into the arm, and similar things happen because there is much pain involved.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 "And whenever this happens with no cause or when you place your finger on the wound and hold it steady as long as possible, until all pain subsides completely; then apply fire to the cautery tool more often than necessary, making it red hot if necessary, while holding it against the vein where you are pressing your finger. Keep applying the tool steadily until no sensation remains.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 "And if it happens while you are pressing your finger against the vein and the cautery tool is still hot, then apply more frequent applications of the burning cautery until all pain subsides.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 "And continue to do this one after another until all pain subsides; and watch that you don't damage the nerve, nor any other injury occur on the wound; make sure when the artery is cut, it cannot be treated properly by cautery alone or extraction alone, but rather by a combination of stitches, or by strongly tying off the vessel with thread, or by using medicines applied to the wound that have power to heal the injury. And let it remain steady and controlled.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Who will treat with gentleness of dressing or cutting things that are sharp on the body, or other similar things, he won't benefit from it at all
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And if it happens without any medicine present, then you must apply your finger to the wound as we have said, and gently stretch until it is closed and smooth on the vein; and do not move it should stay still, but the pain from outside freezing or becoming cold that way staying frozen and stretched out.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 This sentence is incomplete in Old French because "de" (meaning 'of') was omitted after the word "cures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 In the second part of this sentence "de" was added after "cures.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 "Furthermore, in this chapter there is more risk and fear than when performing the fire therapy, so it's advisable to use greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 "In the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 "I advise you not to make a mistake.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 "Different people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 "Those who are in such a state that they will die with ease because of the severity and cruelty of their illness; one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 "Listen carefully now, I am telling you.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not advisable to consent with these methods if you are not sure about them but use more caution in your practice and make sure you take the necessary precautions before proceeding; also consider using predictions and indications for healing wounds so that they can be healed successfully. This will help increase your reputation, honor, and memory of long service.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Dear friends, our dear superiors require a solemn and correct interpretation, and may the Holy Spirit inspire you with its gentle guidance through your hands, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 I have ordered this chapter to be read by the doctors as they are the ones who perform cauteries; for it is in their hands where one can find more lightly what one ought to know best.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 "Do you mean by 'dou chief plein d'aigue'?
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 This disease often occurs when the head is pressed too hard against something soft or tender, and never returns as long as it has been treated correctly.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And I have often seen that this disease occurs in children, and the death usually comes from it; so I think it's worth having a closer look at its causes.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And the child was pressed so hard against something soft that it could not hold up any longer, and I believed there must have been too much moisture between the cheek and bone.  And because of this moisture, sores were made on his cheeks where they now lie, between the cheek and bone; and therefore the wounds are such that if the moisture is removed between the cheek and bone, he may be able to heal the wound further.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 When the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, if you pierce through with a cross-cut method as follows
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 And if the moisture is at the bone, and you see the incisions deep into a certain part of the body, and when you press on your hand's thumb towards it, do not let go as long as you hold
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After incision is complete, moisture has been removed.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After binding the wounds and applying oil, wax, and leave it in its fifth stage; then treat with lotions and ointments, hold steady the wound until it has dried, allowing to drain the blood from the meat as much as possible from moisture so that the limb remains comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	 Another way of incision is to look at the size and arrangement of it abscess, as it should be no longer than this; nor any part behind or side thereof; neither shall there ever be frontward nor upward.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 "When the abscess is opened and the vein is filled with blood, do not let go of it while holding tightly onto its base, or else you will lose a lot of blood due to bleeding from an injury.
de reume	 "In order
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 "When someone has a disease that affects the eyes or ears, and it is serious, and treatment with medicine does not help at all, except for cauterization of the vessels.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 "In order to prevent the eyes from closing tightly when cauterization is performed on them, after applying a tight bandage over their eyelids so they are closed and stable; then look at whether there is any bleeding, if there is, stop it immediately with a soft gauze of appropriate size.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 "And if you see a vein and an artery connected together, then cut them apart as I just mentioned.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the veins are opened continuously for too long, it is necessary to stop this procedure.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the artery is not open continuously but for a short while only, then measure out three times with a needle; and if there is any bleeding from it, bandage and tie it tightly to stop the bleeding, and apply treatment as quickly as possible until it stops.
de emigrainne	 In other words, you are asking me for an
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When you sneeze or cough, the moisture in your eyes and sinuses can cause inflammation of the nasal mucosa and similar things, which is treated with remedies for colds and all that does not benefit me if arteries in the nose are cautorized as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 "The method of extraction is such that the hairs on one's temples are plucked when they reach their length and evenness. When an artery pierces through into the temple, as it does with great force, and is immediately released from cold once blood stops flowing; if released, there is a strange sensation in the hand holding them away, then gently pluck off any rough hairs, after which take care to remove any sudden heat until the artery clearly emerges.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 "After carefully feeling around the artery and tracing it upwards towards its point, make sure to remove any excess fabric that may be on both sides of it; as for delicate parts, if you feel a small amount near the edge, then neatly tuck away those fragments according to their quantity.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 "If it is not released completely, make sure to avoid any sudden movements at all times.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 "And if you pierce it with a sharp needle of double strength silk thread, and the wound is suddenly infected, causing pain and swelling in the limbs; then put on cautery to remove the infection as quickly as possible.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 "Cauteries are used to finish drying up the moisture: it is therefore more helpful in drying up the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 "When extracting arteries, it is advisable to apply a wet cotton pad and wrap the artery well; if you tear or cut through it, use cautery as much as possible so that bleeding can be stopped quickly; when applying a tourniquet made of glass, do not tighten too tight otherwise it will freeze and cause damage.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 When the extremities are too tense, if he takes less heat
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And if the second vein is not easily accessed, and you feel hot between the two veins as soon as it touches the bone, stop the bleeding immediately.
des larmes	 of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 When the tears from the eyes run down onto the cheeks that are against the cheekbone, and if you see the vein bulging around it as soon as it touches your forehead, and you feel hot between your eyebrows; and your nose is stuffy and moist so that your hair on paper is itching, and the papers are scorched and heated by tears' heat. If this cure fails.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 The old remedy was called "blistering," and it meant to make the veins stand out from the forehead; and if you do this every day until they are long enough to reach your nose, then cut them off at that point. And tie back your hands away from continuing with your jaw muscles, and be sure not to make an incision into the arteries that run through those tissues. And stop the continuation of your lower limbs as well; and apply a piece of sponge or cloth to wash it out immediately; then wipe it clean with two cloths tied together
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 The first incision is made at the temple next to the second incision; and spread all over the area between them up to the side of the nose, then remove this middle incision next to the other one, and finally extract the sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 The instrument used in the first cut is called "culterelle", and it is very sharp on one side, but soft on the other. It leaves a mark like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the wound towards the ear on one side and towards the bone on the other, leaving it as smooth as possible by the time of closing.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And sew the veins that are about to be cut as much as possible while the incision is still fresh from the ear towards the bone; and then close it next time with a bandage of soft cotton, put moist linen and oil and aloe on it, and keep an eye on the wound so nothing happens. After closing the third time, apply basilicon ointment for healing wounds, or other cures like ointments that heal sores, as long as they are sane
dou reume des eulz	 two times of wounds
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 when there is no vein available commonly, you see the veins being very small and thin, and try to block them, and burn the paper; the hairs grow in height, and cause great pain, they are inflamed; but if these accidents occur that those matters come to nothing, and death comes.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And then you instruct the patient to put their head back on the table, and then make one large cut in the forehead, and another one wide enough at the top of it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 Then start with cutting from the front of the temple to the back of it, and if you get to the bone, then drain all the blood into a sponge; afterwards wash between the two layers of the incision with gauze soaked in vinegar and oil, so as not to cause injury while dressing up.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 In one way: take two parts of flour and four of cinnamon, and put them together; and the physician should apply it to the wounds when he arrives
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal or piercing of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 One of the things that pierces or removes our ears is one of these: grains, chaff, straw, or similar substances; or smoke, if it has ashes and embers; or stones, if they are jagged and sharp; or some other such thing.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something pierces the ear in a manner that is not comfortable to the ear, or when it is inserted into the ear itself (not just touching), then place the ear on its side (lie down).
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the piercing and there is no oil of any color or olive-colored, then apply the extraction method; and if one of the condis appears, stop the bleeding by placing it in the ear canal or inserting cotton wool or cotton into the ear to plug it up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Once there is an issue with this treatment, if it does not occur, then the patient must undergo gentle extractions
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 If the issue occurs frequently or in different ways, then gentle extractions should be performed with great care and precision to ensure proper healing.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If none of the previous methods work or if there is a specific issue with one method (e.g., you cannot remove the abscess completely), then use more aggressive methods: gently extract it between your fingers and twist its base to tear out; hold it steady while twisting, so that any remaining particles do not get into your eye or mouth.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And he shall loosen it, if unable to extract, and then apply a gentle touch according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 Then make an incision in the grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not cut the grain when you think it is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made multiple attempts; then extract with careful pinches and in succession, if as we have said, so that extractions are smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the meantime, when it is convenient to make the ear numb with cotton, gently press on both sides of the earlobe first and then gently press on the inside part of the ear.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And it shall be used for either ear equally or whichever one is easier to reach.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 It should not be removed until you are ready.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Do not remove it until you are ready; and if one of the joints in the ear gets hot, put on another joint with fire so that they both burn equally.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 "The removal of the abscess may be painful if it is small or many other things, cure as we have mentioned in the division; but if it is large and severe, then it cannot be extracted without pain.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 "When extracting the earwax, when you cure as we have mentioned in the division and or treat distillations, and the care does not profit, if it is advisable that you look at the ear to the sun. If there are no veins, then they will be extracted gently, and if they do not open, then take a cotton swab and gently clean the canal of where it is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 "And sometimes one has very bad earwax or a very large one.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 "And you should gently clean the ear canal according to how much pain is caused by the earwax, and then continue until all of it has been removed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not respond as I have said in the previous sentence and are silent like what we have experienced when cutting into veins, then you will find or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines through the ears at all times using this instrument, because that is how it works.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And whether it's gold or silver, squeeze the nose to release them and press through a straw for the distillation; and if you see foam on your face or in your ears, that means there is boiling oil coming from the distillation, so stop the process immediately because hot oil burns are very painful.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 No child is born without any ear piercing; and this thing happens as often by the removal of a wound or damage to the ear itself, so that no one ever comes out in his ear if he cannot see clearly; and no one can see him well at all times.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 When it is necessary to see clearly and cannot be seen because of the ear damage, there are more dispositions for treatment than before. And when you want to check if all is well inside (i.e., whether all is in order), please put the ear lobe into sunlight; look at them: If you see the hair growing on one side, that means everything is fine.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 And it is also necessary to check in front and behind for any damage or swelling of the ear; if you see hair growth on one side but not another, indicating subtle injury, with a tightly closed eyelid until all swelling has subsided completely.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And when they have been healed with a gentle application of fire, then place the coals in their ear
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 When the patient has had healing with gentle application of fire to their ear, gently apply coals and hold steady so as not to disturb the nerves in their ear; then put into their ear a tent made of fine linen and soaked in honey-based syrup
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 As long as the wound is being treated or you put a tent made of fine linen and soaked in honey-based syrup on their ear, and if an abscess forms inside it apply powder from vitriol paste to cover it up; then continue treatment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 If there is another abscess or condition that requires further treatment after the wound has healed and you have applied a wet cloth to their ear and used other remedies for previous abscesses that were treated, continue with further treatments as needed.
de la char des papieres	 of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 To dry the paper cuts, you should soak them in water until they are damp and then squeeze them gently between your fingers, and apply a small amount of glue to their roots. Then seal it with a thin strip of adhesive.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And without delay, if the localized cautery is too subtle and doesn't take effect immediately after incision, then cautery will be performed afterwards. Many times repairs are needed for no reason of roots; and when they have been burned by fire, their roots become numb and do not come back at all.
de la gresle	 from the neck
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times there are papers that seem to grow in shape and substance but for this disease they call "greatness" meaning a gathering of excessive moisture on the paper itself and around it; their appearance is like: take a wide part then gently remove some small parts, then press firmly with fingers, and apply glue.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you do not cover it with paper, then the wound shall heal and grow large if it is stitched up properly, and for a small cut, one should apply pressure so that blood does not flow too much because the ends will heal together
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 If the wound is large and descending towards one ear and then towards the other side, if you cover it with paper, bind it tightly so that bleeding stops completely; for when the wound is closed, pour oil from a clean cloth to heal the lower part of what causes damage as long as the wounds are properly bandaged.
de la graisse des eulz	 fat of eyelids
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinach is a fat that adheres to the eyelids of people as young as children; it causes swelling and itching, causing them to look at nothing but darkness because tears fill their eyes too much; and for this reason they cover their faces with damp towels to soften them and hide their appearance when they wash.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you push on the left side of your chest, it will release gas from inside you
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 The way to perform it is by making the patient place their hand in tone and then applying a band around it like a circle encompassing all of its circumference, and then tying it off at one end; pressing down with both hands from opposite sides and when the release comes through, you pull on each side as if trying to make them come back together into a circle. This continues until the release is gathered up in one piece, similar to how fat pieces are gathered after slaughtering an animal
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Stretch out all the way with your arm extended to one side and then the other until it's taut; keep in mind not to apply pressure on the bandage while doing so as you would not want to tear it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 And when the fire is applied at the beginning of the cure, gently as long as it burns; then rinse away the soot and ashes in this manner and evenly, and place on the wound, and hold tight to the skin.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if there are such burns that pierce through it and put it near so as to contaminate the moisture which is being treated.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue with the treatment until it stops burning.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes loose from the abscess while performing a poultice, then continue with the poultice pressing as tightly as possible until it stops coming loose.
des poilz des papieres	 hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 When the hairs grow from paper that is not natural and are even, if they irritate the eyes, and cause eye problems, like tearing or swelling of the eyelids, and skin diseases such as rashes, as long as it's because of the destruction of the hair; and treatment should be done according to these ways: either by fire cautery, or by poultice made from an appropriate substance depending on what kind of chapter is being written, and it may be performed through incision and stitching, or by pulling out, based on which method I have described.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Here is the translation: "It's important to gently massage the affected area with oil on your hand, and if it burns or stings, apply a small bandage of cotton cloth and gauze, then bind onto paper a figure of an anchor for support as needed, until you are done massaging.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 "If the paper is soft and smooth to touch (which indicates that it has been dampened), start by gently massaging along all of the lines you've drawn until they are complete. Then, stitch them together with fine wool thread in a way similar to how an anchor might look, as needed for support during healing. If there is no other option available and if you have finished the stitching process but still notice bleeding or excess stitches, then simply leave it unstitched at this point.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then hold it gently, with slight force, according to its shape.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 Then, if you are unable to hold it still and the pain is intense or accompanied by swelling or redness, then use this incision as well:
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 Then, if the incision is according to this shape and you fold it gently as we have said, then make two incisions from both ends of the paper, similar in size but one a little smaller than the other; grasp them together with gentle pressure on both sides near where it joins from the back, hold tightly until pain subsides or until you choose to release it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If the patient is lying down and his foot touches a hard surface, then treat him as soon as possible; and if he has an ulcer on his heel, and it heals with a bandage, they will no longer itch. And you should follow this form according to this figure, and in accordance with this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Take an extremely fine needle and thread of silk very soft and delicate; then sew the two cuts together gently, so that one end of the longer thread is long enough to reach with its tip at least as far as your thumb on your hand. Then take another finer thread from silk slightly, and sew it to the other cut carefully, covering all the hairs. And afterwards put a bandage over the wound while still holding them with both hands tightly, so that no hair will be torn out until they are completely healed by nature's own power; then gently remove one hair at a time, pulling them off in turns from the ends of each thread and collecting them as you go along.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And the chase is treated and the hairs do not come away with it, if you pull out the string as ordered all over from where you started to where you finished, so long as the hair grows in its own way and does not grow back until it stops growing; and if the hairs are cut off at their roots by nature, and you leave one of them, then extend that strand which you left.
de la porriture de l’oil	 Of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 This illness is called aleacrati or comes with oil poisoning, and there are two ways to deal with it: naturally and unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And in the same manner of injury, whether it is a burn or a treatment for hairs, as well as similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 "The procedure involves cutting into the shoulder and resetting it in place after dislocation due to moisture.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 "If you do this procedure incorrectly and it worsens the situation; but there are remedies that can help if done correctly, such as using ice to reduce swelling and inflammation.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 "The key to your treatment is that you must remember how the injury occurred and ensure it doesn't happen again in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 The character who comes with oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness is commonly referred to as "axactract," and is a natural occurrence, not due to external factors
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The injury comes from the wound and burning and cauterization of similar things; and the way to treat it is when you press an arrowhead, there will be two wounds, one at the front and one at the back, so that they are both open in each blow, then seal the two wounds on both sides with a large needle.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the figure of the paper returns to that which is right; but if it's not, then when you cut away from it and tear off the paper, make two cuts or crease them at both sides of the incision, so that they are both open in each blow, then seal the two wounds on both sides with a large needle. And put the stitches according to how many creases there are, as long as they are closed, so that the figure is like that of a letter which has no 'g' in it; then sew up those parts together, and bind them with one thread of sinew; and apply the cure of what we have said about the ointments for wounds.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 "The illness comes from burns or cuts or cauterization. It is advisable to make a burn straight across the skin with a blade when treating these types of injuries, and depending on what it is that is currently visible; after which you must perform the operation according to its shape because they vary in form, and the most important thing is to return the figure to its natural shape as quickly as possible; and the pain, depending on what was appropriate for treatment and the severity.
dou soudement de la papiere	 "The paper is also being mentioned here. The sentence suggests that it's
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The bandage is being mentioned here as well. The sentence suggests that you should apply the bandage to the skin with white oil-based ointment, so it does not move and cause injury if pricked; after which you must perform the operation according to its shape because they vary in form, returning the figure to its natural shape as quickly as possible; then use two stitches and similar things until everything is healed. After that, apply a soft linen bandage on top of the oil-based ointment with plenty of padding; wait for it to dry completely.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the joint of the arm
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 The dislocation is in two ways: one is nervous and similar to sharp pain, and another which is not nervous but is similar to freezing cold when you touch it with force and treat it as if you had frozen it; both of them cause great pain and move very slowly until they catch all the blood and light and movement of the arm.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 The incision method is as follows: First you should hold the joint firmly with your hand and cut through it, then remove any excess skin and tie off the ends. Then apply a sharp needle to prick at the base of the dislocation so that when force or cold is applied to it during treatment, no harm will come from it; there are also two ways in which you can treat the dislocation: one way involves freezing it gently with ice wrapped around it while leaving its natural course undisturbed, and another involves using a horsehair needle which you tie off at both ends.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And guard that the delicate skin does not touch the rough surface and tears it apart, and the pruning shears should not be pierced; after cutting into it for a short time with a sharp blade, a cool feeling is experienced throughout all over, and he leaves to another corner; then treat it as desired until it becomes sane.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 "And the needle is not nervous, and you should not pull out the hair; and the thorns cannot enter many times into the treatment of this kind of medicine; and in its division, if you observe closely, after washing with water, apply gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 "And gently remove the hair from its base, and if you notice it is becoming pale and the reason for this is pressing into your nose, if you taste the oil with a cool feeling and burning sensation on both cheeks, and tear off the oil to another corner; then continue with the other area according to this method of treatment, as long as it remains smooth.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "In any case, if you prick your finger and hold it down for a while, then release it slowly, as long as the finger is still straight.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 "When the appearance of the body becomes emaciated through great suffering if it is held for a long time and then released in small amounts without losing consciousness entirely, but tears flow continuously; until finally there is a reddening due to exhaustion.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 "Of the character that was on the prison
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 "The incision must be done carefully and gently with small force to prevent damage to the arteries or veins, and then apply compresses soaked in vinegar if it is necessary; after completing the incision and ensuring everything heals well without any complications, continue applying compresses until you feel a coolness on the wound, which means that healing has begun. Then return to your duties as soon as possible.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 But always ensure that you align the treatment of any weak veins as well as those due to accidents and not let your hand move at all during these surgeries until both members are straight
des voines des eulz	 limbs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 The blood vessels that are covered by the oil become weaker with time and harden as they become injured
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 The first thing to do is look at the oil closely; if you see any blood vessels that are injured or weakened by the oil, then stop using it immediately and consult with a doctor.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 Then proceed in descending order to the other veins as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 Then forcefully squeeze the remaining weak veins until they are no longer covered by the oil, and make sure not to let any of them bleed; keep the oil in a cloth at arm's length from you while performing this surgery, so as not to burn yourself with its heat, and perform it during midday when exposed to sunlight. Make sure that your hand is steady throughout the process if you want to avoid cutting veins; once complete, filter the used oil through a cloth or rag stained red for stains, and store it separately.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	 And if you are unable to pluck all of this in that time period, then apply a numbing agent to the painful parts of the eyes, and leave it on for as long as there is pain or sensitivity, until they become insensitive and numb.
de la fistule de l’oil	 the abscess
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 The "arissati" fistula is being referred to here. When it is treated with cautery and with burning medicines as I have already mentioned, or if the abscess itself becomes inflamed while treating it, then one must endure all of its moisture until it has passed away.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And when the eyes are opened and you see corruption and darkness. If there is nothing left to cover it with, then call "aspore chef," or burn it away immediately, making sure not to get near a flame while in this state.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 "And apply pressure to the broken bone until it is set back into place correctly, and then make a fist with your other hand so that you can hold it securely in place as long as necessary for the correction.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 "And if you have already tried to remove the bone spur on another occasion and it did not heal or improve as expected, then try removing it again by force. Be careful, though; do not use force that would cause harm.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 "Then remove the bone spur from your hand and place it back on the finger as you forcefully put it there. Hold the finger steady while removing it to prevent any movement of the fingers or hand. When finished, be sure to clean all the incisions with care, just like I instructed previously, unless the matter is light and easy.
de l’issue de l’oil	 from the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the arms are stretched out fully and no longer bent inward, if necessary, tie them down with a rope or bandage so they don't move; then apply oil to prevent bruising and soothe the skin, using incense and aloe, and apply sarcoline, and strain the area gently and let it heal slowly.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 The dislocation of the shoulder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When dislocations occur on the surface of the eye, first open and press down gently with paper to apply pressure until the dislocation is reduced or corrected.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the eye swells or becomes inflamed after the dislocation reduction, apply pressure gently to reduce swelling and prevent further damage until the eye has healed completely.
de la bowe de l’oil	 This phrase could mean "from the beginning of [something]" in English.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This illness is called "acunntati" and occurs when the abscess is opened up; it may cause bleeding or swelling as well.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 "If you see blood between your fingers, take a sharp needle and prick the base of the nail with it gently, continuing to the nail bed as well, until it stops bleeding; and when it's done, if hot oil is available, apply it hot directly on the wound or fenugreek mixed with honey, whichever is available. Keep applying other remedies while you wait for this one.
des aigues de l’oil	 "hot oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 "We have had experiences with dislocations, and that's why we should pay attention to it.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 "It is important to make sure the wound between your fingers receives hot oil gently and steadily until it stops bleeding; then apply the instrument used for acupuncture (almagda) to the base of the nail on one hand while applying another method with a needle on the other, as if you were drawing two circles. Continue doing this repeatedly.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 Now he holds his breath, seeing the arrows before him and the instrument at its sheath
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After rest period I, he repeats the process of removing arrow by using instrument and holding his breath when it is stuck in place until released slowly one at a time
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then proceeds to extract the arrows or foreign object from the eye with oil as described and in a manner that is not painful
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 Now, for those of us who are skilled at this, let's proceed to our task with plenty of oil.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the eye cannot enter oil through its orifice because it has tough eyelids, then you should take an instrument that is called "the eyelid spreader," which is used like this.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 "And after the dressing has been removed and you feel any discomfort or pain in your arm, then gently massage it to relieve some of that tension.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 "After the dressing has been removed and you no longer feel any discomfort from it, gently remove any remaining tape to ensure there are no cuts made.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 "And gradually over time it will become comfortable in its own right and you should not worry about any additional pain.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 "And one of the wise men came to us and said that in some countries people eat a lot of almonds because there is no cheese or bread available.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	 These are similar to the forms of almonds, as they cannot be found elsewhere.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And it is the essence of this subtle science and its derivative in three degrees.
de la char sor le neis	 from the shoulder to the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 There are no venomous scorpions that resemble snakes at all, and if there is any scorpion with highly bright color, or one with pale color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 If you encounter such a scorpion that is sick and not healed yet, hold the scorpion between your hands facing the sun; and apply its eyes to the sick one's eye, and put it in the fire; but ensure that you are supporting carefully with the delicate subtle edge of the other hand as well.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 "If there is nothing to prevent it, if you gently massage the joint slightly, and do not disturb anything; and stay calm, or hold back your breath, as needed; and keep any harmful actions at bay until everything has settled down completely.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 "If you do not disturb it, gently massage the joint slightly; and if needed, hold back your breath or stay calm to prevent any harm. Also keep in mind that this procedure may cause pain at the site of incision, and avoid touching the wounds unless instructed by a doctor.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 "Do not let the sores of the wound fester any longer than necessary. Then wash away the scar and smooth out the incision gently with Egyptian cotton; then bring it to this person as soon as you can; do so three times or more, until all that is made clean from the wound; and afterwards apply a bandage soaked in oil and medicine on it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 "Either of gold or silver, similar to a lamp shade, if you have one, and bring it with you; and if you see that, tie a bandage tightly around the wound as soon as possible; and afterwards anoint the chief with oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 "Of course. Of the scar or the new one?
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 "This ointment is good for both wounds and scars; it helps them to grow and become large as they please, until the eyes are held steady so they don't move. And when you apply this ointment at first, it should be very hot, causing pain if touched inappropriately or too often.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 When the eye is closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 You should treat each individual case separately and take a closer look at this particular ailment.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is advisable to examine the wound closely and assess its freshness; if necessary, take two stitches across it while keeping them tight until they are healed completely, then tie them together, apply dragon powder or incense to it, and leave it so that heat from a fire will draw out any remaining pus.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 The method of stitching is that you use needles if the stitches should be across the abdomen as we mentioned before, or you can use thread if I have explained it to you properly.
des apostemes des levres	 of the arms
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The arms may swell with great pain and many times, until you turn the arm back, and fasten it to your chest, and place a bandage on its wound in every part; then put the tourniquet after cutting into the vein, as long as there is no bleeding; and also apply leeches in wet conditions, curing wounds while they are still sane.
de la char des gencives	 From the neck down
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 The veins in the neck often burst when opened, which are called "albulus"; if you hold them with your fingers and bandage their base or wound, then apply pressure to the severed vein or powders restraining and dehydrating; and if they return after incision, many times occur, unless cauterized a second time, and cauterize: if not come back after cautery; and these are the symptoms of wounds.
des sordens	 sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 None of the sores were healed together at one time in their mouths between the gums, and none of them ever grew white or red, as long as corruption came to the gums, and they could not grow: if you held a wound with it gently between your hands, its wounds would heal; but if you did not fix it firmly on the first try, every subsequent attempt was futile. And when one tooth has been extracted by these means, the others have other forms of healing depending on where they are located, whether in or outside the gums; and all of them and other forms were present with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 "It is advisable when you cure a toothache that you try to bite it as hard as possible, because this must be done correctly and there is no excuse for not doing so.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 "When the hairs are restrained from moving, if you want to prick them at their base, make sure that your hand is steady.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 "It is necessary to cure the toothache many times and make sure it is either a good bite or hold its base tightly when pricking at their base; furthermore, you must hold steady your hand as much as possible until they are well aligned, because we have already tried doing so.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After the patient has been properly restrained from moving around in any way, and if he is not allowed to sit or stand at all, then let them lay flat on a table gently without causing any unnecessary harm.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if you are gently restraining them with bandages and keeping their eyes open, making sure they do not break free from restraint; and also make sure to support the head in such a way that it does not move around unnecessarily.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And do good and keep part of the skin unbroken, and remove the arrow by removing the base causing more severe pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And do good and keep part of the skin unbroken, as when the ignorant know not save by their haste and hardness they break no bone once, nor bring any harm that we have suffered; but may come never through the injury caused to them by roots or the path they break, if like us you want; and when dislocations occur, whether from wine or iron, let water be used instead of vinegar, as we always do. And whenever wounds are found, may good come to heal, that often comes about, unless cauterization is done.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	 The forms of the vessels are that which prevent them from moving at first, being short and stout, they do not double as much when you touch their teeth; these are the shapes.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 They can be large members if they cannot stand still on their own, and should be made of iron so that they hold well and are strong enough to stay in place.
de la racine des dens	 from the roots of them
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When their roots become loose and start to pull away, it is advisable that you put a ligature around the lower end of them to hold them in place.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 As long as the veins are firm and not broken or torn, you should tie them with strong thread in a way that is similar to how they look.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots try to break through all of these veins, it is advisable that you uncover and expose the root, and use an instrument called "althalie", which means strong thread in French.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 And either small or large if it doesn't break through, and then root is inserted as a result. If not, if you need to help from above the tendons, towards their shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if there are any such instruments that can help, what is their shape.
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other limbs in front of the reason for the pain, and a tool that seems to have large tendons.
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 The greatest subtlety of the master's instrument is that he can break through any bone or joint without causing harm to other bones, and if there are no such instruments available, which could cause injury.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And let the bone be well positioned so it cannot move but can hold and straighten; and then apply remedies as needed to that affected joint, and if there is pain in the joint due to small swelling, use only gentle measures.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 When the teeth appear to be small and weak, or if they are pointed in such a way that they cannot stay straight, then you should gently massage them into place after washing; do not force it too much as this can damage their enamel.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And when the gums get very sensitive due to the toothache, and for this reason you do not move the other teeth, if there is pain from one loose tooth like that which has a certain shape,
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 And when one pulls out the arrow with gentle hands and slowly, if it doesn't move as soon as it sticks; then at last all the strength is gone, and the eye becomes too heavy to hold onto its tongue, so that you may be able to remove the arrow only when it is already hardened.
quant li dent lochent	 When one tooth falls out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the front tooth falls out, whether by shock or by chewing, and they are unable to be held tightly enough that it falls out, you should cure with strong astringents like gold or silver thread; but if they are too thick or thin according to the amount of space between the teeth, bind them between two healthy teeth and hold on until they grow back. Then sew a piece over where you sewed it up, then gently and steadily hold onto your hand until they don't move anymore.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 "Make the cuts deep and straight, and then bind them together. If you slip or cut through a healthy vein while binding, let that vein be your guide; if it is injured, make another cut there instead of slipping.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 "When you cut through the tooth and the dentist resets it back into place in several cuts as we've described; do not let go of it if there is any slip or failure, and hold tight until all wounds are healed.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 "Wrap around that piece of tongue tightly.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 "Do not touch the tongue or nature unless it is necessary to do so; for accidental wounds can happen and you risk injuring yourself; also keep in mind that too much pressure on the artery might lead to tearing of the vein wall; so be gentle when cutting through, but hold tightly enough to stop any movement until it heals. After cutting, remove the excess hair gently from above and below unless there is a cold sore present where you must wait for the sore to heal first before removing hair.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 "The patient must cease all movement when applying the cold iron treatment and hold it steady if using a cautery. If the cautery is applied to a lesion, they will remain motionless until they heal.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The patient must cease all movement when applying the cold iron treatment and hold it steady if using a cautery. If the cautery is applied to a lesion that may cause pain or burning sensation, then they should remain motionless until the wound heals completely; thereafter continue with other treatments as needed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 "The throat abscess
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 "No time comes for the voices of the throat that are called 'godath', and they should only be cured with the two fingers; however, if you cure them as we have described in the division, and they remain sane, make sure: it is a dangerous thing to apply too much pressure or to use fire.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if the redness and root are large, do not touch it with fire, as otherwise it will lead to necrosis; but let it be as long as it is alive, and when you leave or it would break by itself; and if there's a small flame, and the root is subtle, then look first at its base and make sure it is in place.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Do not put the wound in front of the sun when it is fresh and its cheeks are firm, and wash the mouth and first clean your hands as well. And press the tongue to all parts of the instrument, that way
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And if you press the tongue to all parts of the instrument and see the base, then draw out the hair from one side by pulling it towards your hand; and tie any object in with, then tie a cord around the instrument so that its shape is seen. That seems like strong work; and every part should be bent and twisted, and they are sharp and make of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this tool, when it comes to hold, of course it is necessary.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And on one hand and the other part of it; and when you have covered one side with this tool, if you cover the other in a similar manner, after incision gargle with hot water, and gently and easily, until such pain ceases to be felt by others or wounds occur due to burning.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And to a woman of one side who had a dense lump in her throat, it was known that the voice organ was of small size; and if she could not exhale through the passage which was blocked, nor drink water, nor eat, nor live for long, or died
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 "And their eyes were swollen as if he had been weeping for two nights.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 "I endured it for a long time and cut off one of the nails with my own hand, but this did not help at all, so I sought out another nail to remove as well.
de l’uve	 From above
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 "When the vein returns and it is full open, it is perpendicular; but if it is very large or round, it is called a vein.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is healed as we have described in the division, and its treatment does not benefit, you see that the tail of the sheep stays still, and it is subtle, if you take care to cope with her; and that which is round and not long enough, she is bloody or bruised or black, if it is convenient for you to make an incision on him.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 There is great danger in the abscess.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 It is convenient that when you see it, according to the way I have described its color and length, you should make sure it is in front of the sun's rays, and press on its tongue as we mentioned before; then cut away any excess skin and treat each other as stated earlier.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is convenient that you do not remove any excess tissue beyond nature's limit; because if you do more than this, the voice and throat may be injured, after the incision use what we have said in the incision of the two arteries, and cure as much as she can.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of cautery should be consistent and even.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the manner of applying the cautery is to place them on the skin and press with an even firm touch as suggested in the chapter about fire cautery.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you put on the medicine, if it is a poultice, place them all over the skin and press firmly with an even touch as suggested in the chapter about fire cautery, ensuring that they are not too thick nor too thin; then apply the instrument to cover everything from head to toe using the poultice. If you have experience with applying poultices, follow these steps after applying the poultice: wrap cotton around your hand and press it on the wound as described in this chapter, until all wounds are covered or until there is no more pain and the blisters have healed; then take a break for four to five hours before repeating. If you experience nausea or choking, cool the poultice with ice water, if needed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 This cure is more effective than the cautery incision. If it's cured with fumigation according to this method, gently apply and wipe away, adding garlic, oregano, thyme, rosemary, and similar herbs; and then put them in water and boil well. The broth should be rich in minerals and nourishing for all of these.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 Either of gold or silver, and when you bite into the abscess as long as steam comes from it through the vein, until the abscess is cured; after the cure has been applied, so that you do not start anything at the beginning of the next day, because more things will happen; and do not forget to perform this treatment every other day.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 If the instrument is not present, then take a knife and insert it into the abscess just above its base if it does not have too much heat or steam; for this is a good cure to do together with salubrity.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 When encountering a fish bone or any other object in the throat, if it is advisable to do so, you should take whatever you can see and press your tongue against the roof of your mouth; and when something is obstructing your view, you must force vomiting with whatever comes into contact first. If swallowing something like a sponge, a piece of bread, or any other object causes distress, vomit forcefully on that item until it passes from the stomach.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 And when the object is in close proximity to the throat and can enter more easily or has raised the head high, avoid touching your tongue against it, lest all of its parts cause injury; and make sure that whatever you take into your mouth first does not cause pain nor break your teeth. If the item is swallowed, then force swallowing on it as long as possible until it enters everything else.
de la sansue de la gorge	 "of the nature of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 There is no medicine for this ailment unless I have mentioned it in the previous section, by curing of medicines; and whenever you see this throat sore exposed to sun, then you must press your tongue against the instrument that I told you earlier.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see this ailment appear suddenly, or even in small quantities, then hold tight and try to find out what it is
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this doesn't work when you take a cold compress and place it in the throat sore, then you should try rubbing alcohol on it.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 If there is any other ailment that occurs here at all times.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And if you see the ailment at any time, then take a cold compress and put it in your mouth, hold it with your throat to swallow it down, and move it quickly to its place on your hand; and when the sore feels hot, stop
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 "And if she does not sit as we have said, and the abscess is infected with pus-like substance, I will perform fumigations many times, because it needs frequent treatment.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of the fumigation procedure includes having a flame to burn out any soot that may exist inside; and sealing it with a cloth for future use, but if she does not sit as instructed, perform fumigations many times because she needs frequent treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	 The form of the instrument to apply on her is such that if you see through it closely, there are thorns which may enter into the throat; and it has a resemblance to the beak of a bird, and it has an aspect like lime, so that when she takes it, she cannot spit it out.
li chapistres des apostemes	 The surgeon makes an incision
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 The veins and arteries are the same, as stated in this book, unless they are perforated or cut into two pieces; but it is done with moisture one way, and of that way which it holds to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 The second method involves piercing the ends at the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 The veins and arteries that are closest to the heart have different characteristics than those at the extremities, and these veins at the base of the neck differ in structure from those connected by joints, each having its own judgement concerning their nature.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 If a vein is pierced punctually as it reaches its completion, and if there are any that should be pierced when they have been cut off, then the veins do not die according to their cutting, but according to whether or not they come from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 "When an arm comes out of its socket," the text continues, "and it is held firm until it becomes solid and stable through pressure from both sides, as a result causing contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 "If the joint is dislocated from its primary member," it states, "and if you try to perforate or puncture through the bone as long as it is moist, but only when it reaches that part will there be a perforation and a fistula form. And cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 "When you are done with the perforation of that member," it continues, "and if the pain is over and the bleeding has stopped, and the pain relief and rest have ended, and the debate and agitation from the base of the joint end; then make sure to make the perforation as dependent on that member, so that when they become open there should be a perforation at their cross. And ensure the joints or arteries are not harmed in any way, nor the nerves.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 "In these cases where one member dislocates.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the arm is in a sling after injury, if you allow it to remain that way until it is healed completely as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 If you pierce through this, it will cause the veins in his arms to swell and become painful, and eventually harden them up for him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any joint is pierced through both sides of the arm, it will make the limbs weaker and more prone to dislocation.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And you should stretch the joints gently, slowly, and in proportion to their size; if there are such joints or it is convenient to cut them out, as we do with bubbles, if they become tight, as was said before; if a joint is bent at three angles or has other similar bends, like that of an elbow; and if you make one loop around and others in proportion too, just as the arm does.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Here comes the first sentence to translate.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 Because the joints were not properly aligned or secured, many times they dislocated and caused significant pain and injury to the patient.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When using a severe fire cautery procedure and if you apply the bandage tightly after applying it to the abscess, be cautious about any bleeding that may occur, especially when inspecting for cracks or fissures in the abscess wall; take care with each bandaging application of the skin surface near moisture sources as well, ensuring the wound remains clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 "And whenever you encounter a sore or abscess, if you cleanse it with ice and heat, then make the incision gently as many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And whenever you encounter a sore or abscess, if you cleanse it with ice and heat, then make gentle incisions to treat the sores as many times.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 "And it is advisable to do this in all cases before making incisions for abscesses and wounds.
des soros	 "Of sores.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 "Or when you encounter stones (gallstones), and the way that it is removed from bile ducts.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 "The patient should apply pressure and warmth to the affected area due to moisture, as if they were bruises that need to be treated with gentle rubbing; but for those which are deep and painful on touching or feeling, there is no doubt that it will worsen.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 "When the veins of the arm are opened up by mistake or forcefully due to moisture; and if they pierce through anything that is called 'entromissing,' where it goes after piercing, what substance does it contain?
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 "If there is moisture present when you enter the wound, then follow these steps:
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 "If moisture is seen within the wound, leave alone any hairs that contain it, as they will come out when you leave nothing; then wet cotton with Egyptian bandage dressing if present; otherwise use clean gauze and cover the wound until another doctor can attend to it.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And then you should repeat this procedure as many times as necessary to ensure it doesn't cause any pain or discomfort, and treat the wound with whatever is most convenient until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 "And if the veins are not cut straight but in this manner long and thin, and if you pierce through any part of them, then hold your breath until they close up.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 "And if the veins are pierced, and you tie off tightly as I have advised, and cure them properly.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 "Cut through the veins when they are less strong, because it's easier to seal off since there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 "And if any of these veins or the smallest ones are dry and without moisture, take one from a very old woman; and you will find that vein like a sharp arrowhead, hard and bright, which cannot be split open; and if not done properly it will cause harm just as much.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 "In other words, when you come to the end or beginning of a verse or sentence, those who are coming should also start from the end or beginning of their ears, and this is very important because sometimes you need to make it as dependent on how long ago it was.
des scrophules	 "softness of the ear
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 "Often times come to the abscess on the arm, and then go to the elbow, and the shoulder, they always come back together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 "And whenever the abscess is properly treated on one side, as we have said before, if there are similar abscesses on both sides.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There were some people who contained moisture, and those who did not want to obey to health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 "When you see good disposition in the shoulder, and similarity to both sides, and nothing is missing from one side or the other, if it seems necessary for treatment on that part, then make an incision through all of them; and also remove any excrescence from that part.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you prick at the vein or artery and it doesn't let go, put a poultice on top of the wound to stop bleeding.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the abscess is drained and comes back to you, then squeeze it as much as possible; also, if any small worms come out along with it, squeeze them too.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if the worm is in a large vein at its root, only squeeze that vein at its base with two strong threads and hold it with one hand; then wash the wound with Egyptian cotton wool and then treat the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you squeeze all the abscess, make sure to collect and apply both plasters at once; then do not worry about whether it is from a large abscess or small.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 "It is advisable to go gently when trying to get at the root of it, and pulling slowly as we have advised.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those who have excessive scrofula may perceive it as an ulcer when they touch the base of it and can be held steady by pulling gently; in doing so, you must avoid tearing or damaging anything nearby that could lead to further infection, especially if the wound is already well healed.
de squinance	 Squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 They spoke of the tonsillectomy procedure, but I did not find any evidence that it exists in our land and this is the proof of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 Those who have squintance must remove the epiglottis, which is called "epiglote," and this cannot be helped by that alone, because all the veins in the neck as well as those in the mouth are affected when there was injury to an abscess in the throat or in the esophagus.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 "When a disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so as to prevent choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 "When we want to split the epiglottis, it should be done between the third and fourth circles or in two smaller cuts across them, near the base of the epiglottis; do not go through the cartilage, as they may end up being too thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 "If the surgeon is very cautious, they should extend the skin of the throat to its fullest extent, and then cut as close as possible to the larynx; and cure any wounds that may occur, you will see nothing, but continue the incision anyway; show them by cutting through the flow of the larynx which flows past the broken point at the back, and from the failure in speaking. Leave the wound to heal.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the hour has passed of doubt regarding the attachment, gather together the two edges of the wound and sew them completely in the shape of a strip; then administer healing ointments as long as he is sane
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis does not allow one to remain as long as the throat is completely closed and the patient has been killed by it or otherwise failed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 After the epiglottis has been removed because it cannot be opened and breathing is through the wound, and death approaches, and by order of the physician must leave the wound open as long as there are no signs of disease progression or until healing reaches 3/4s or 4/5ths.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw a maiden who had lost her tongue, and it was in her throat, part of the pharynx is missing, I appealed for his cure, but she died anyway.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 "I discovered the wound and found that it was caused by an abscess, but I realized that no treatment could be performed without causing a blockage in her throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 "I hurriedly did the wound treatment and cured it as quickly as possible; however, I had to avoid speaking for her after recovering so she could regain her voice.
de la grosse gorge	 "from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 "A hernia of the throat is called a 'throat rupture', and it's often accompanied by a swelling lump, and occurs more frequently in women; there are two ways to approach this situation: naturally or surgically.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 "The accident is approached in two ways: either the one method is to apply a poultice externally and try it internally too, or if you have no poultice at hand, then try this way first.
des nous	 In
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 The same manner as mine are those I will tell all the similarities and differences between one and two.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 I say that issue is cold and dry while it is being peeled off, until the flesh and heat are completed, unless the flesh and heat remain.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With the one it has neither cold nor heat nor pain and contains itself as a sack is according to him his own skin and is according to this his color of the heart, becomes large; and are similar in terms of being wet or dry depending on how I said in the previous section.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is important when you come to the treatment of one that first check thoroughly for any possible tools or instruments that are called "entromissoir" after this as it comes from a surgeon, depending on its form and shape.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 "The method of interrogating the eyes is that you gently press or more moistly than you normally touch on the eyelids, and turn your thumbs inward and outward in an alternating manner until the pupils are dilated to their fullest extent; then let it remain so for as long as possible.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 "When the moisture runs out and it gets dry, if you continue to apply moist heat as I have described in relation to other eyelids; after the dilation, do not add any more moisture, but gently press down with a warm compress on one side or the other of the eye area where there is no pain, so that you can safely wipe off the excess and treat it with clean wipes.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 "If the pain returns repeatedly and intensifies over time, and if there are wounds from corrosive substances that sting or burn, restrain them with compresses applied to the affected area; apply healing ointments as prescribed by a doctor to other wounds in order to heal them all.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 "And when it is contrary or another if you hurry and remove the base of the arrow, leaving him with II or III wounds until he has stopped bleeding, then come back to cover what was lost.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 "Here are the three types of sutures used in surgery, large and mild, small; they are also known as 'Albaret', 'Breb' and have three ways - big, mild, and small - to stitch up the wounds from abscesses; and those that look like arrows or thorns, are made of iron, silver or yellow, and will burn if they touch blackheads; they are used in three ways: large, mild, and small according to the size of the pores.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of the nine days are great and even, as you see here: big, miney and smalls; if one has two scars in three ways, and others have three scars in three ways; and those who have three scars in one way, they are like that; if one has two scars only, and some with a single scar, and they are of the third kind.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The chief of these is to make it sharp and so that only one way can be used when opening the aperture, or otherwise it will not close the vein nor the nerve; and such incisions are closed by stitches in several ways.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And it never occurs at any time to those veins, arteries, or that form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 There are never any veins that get inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they seem like healthy veins; and it makes the veins firm and straight, if necessary according to this form of procedure:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape the fat off, and treat the wound with char until it is cured, then sew up the edges of the wound like this:
des apostemes des asselles	 of abscesses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 The abscesses are filled with pus or moisture and contain sores; as long as there is moisture present.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Whenever there is moisture present, it is advisable to treat the wounds in a specific way, as described in line b of this text.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the boils are on an abscess and if you apply a wet cotton swab to it, then gently remove the cotton swab, wipe off the cotton and continue treating with ointments as long as it remains clean.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscesses are similar to sores as described above for sores, then treat them in a way that is similar to what we have described previously.
de la routure de l’artere	 artery cutting
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When an artery is cut, and the blood vessels are clogged when it reaches there; if many abscesses occur, and all veins become blocked and the abscess breaks open; and if you feel a constriction at both ends, if you sense that bleeding occurs; and if it is due to the vein, then it is recommended to stop applying pressure. And it's foolishness to apply such treatment on an artery without knowing what one is doing, and moreover when there are many abscesses and wounds of various types, and more loss of life will occur.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For the cauterization procedure, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at the base of it, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow. For dislocation, it is recommended to first reset the dislocation.
des apostemes des ners	 of veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 The arteries and veins become inflamed when they are injured or subjected to excessive stress, causing similar symptoms.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 When there are injuries to the arteries or veins, they become inflamed and cause pain in both arms, making it difficult to breath deeply, causing additional pain if one is held down when injured like this:
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the arteries are torn and there is bleeding at their base; if they are very large and piercing into the bone, then the wound must be stitched up as soon as possible to prevent further injury.
des grosses boces pendans	 "large mouths hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 No illness occurred inside and did not spread to any other part of the body, and it is a disease called "fungi" due to its resemblance with those in hot, humid environments; it was subtle in nature, big in size; and one patient who had this had their belly completely covered by fungi, which were white, and had a large root, and were spreading rapidly, and there was moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I observed one of them weighing 18 ounces and the other six ounces; incisions were made in such a way that you look at their eyes while they are moist, and the color of the eyeball is bright white, moist, and subtle root; if you prick with a sharp needle large, then be present when the cautery comes to fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Whenever you prick the abscess excessively with a needle too big to be comfortable or causing great pain at the site of incision due to its sharpness, then stop doing so; and let go of it immediately, hold on until the cautery comes near the eye.  And when you see that the abscess is inflamed and painful from the wound itself, do not prick more, but instead continue with the cauterization; after which, treat the wound and ensure you don't prick further as the abscess may be infected or covered in pus due to its color and poor quality senses and milk growth.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Certainly
quant li boude ist fuer	 When boiling it causes
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of bile comes from a boil or from tearing through the liver, and it occurs in the belly area and is accompanied by vomiting as well, if this happens on other occasions where there are cuts to veins or arteries nearby that cause bleeding, then it must be treated with care; so treat it with caution and pay attention to the color of the stool, and it's a light matter regarding pain, but has various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is from the issue of the intestine then there are many issues and when you press at its two ends repeatedly, and return time after time and by chance if one is sore or enlarged near the entrance to the bowel and due to much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is from moisture then it's a light matter and you should not be afraid; but if there are signs of the abscess being hard or rough, that suggests that there may be many issues as well.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 "If necessary, let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 "Because of doubt and fear, as I have explained in previous comments about the chapter involving the doctor's work.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 "If the intestine or belly is tender and painful to touch, instruct the patient to gently press on it while you hold their hand, then massage the abdomen thoroughly until relief occurs; if the bleeding continues after applying pressure, continue to treat them for their internal injury.
dou chancre	 Then
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 We have discussed the division of chancres and how to treat them with medicines and surgery. And we say that when a chancre is in the groin or anus, one must approach it carefully, causing little pain if possible, as they can be dangerous otherwise.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And in the event that it is located at the groin or anus when one can remove it safely and if possible without causing too much pain, as they are dangerous otherwise.
de ydropisie	 Of the dislocation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Of the dislocation
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And so to two parts
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take two parts.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And he is accustomed to a subtle stinginess, and either of the other parts are ligatured or sewn together with thread, so that they remain in their place; and on one side there are three stitches, on another two stitches, and from yet another part alone, so it is the manner by which the scribes make the wound:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 And he is accustomed to a sharp stinginess, when the instruments come near, so they must now be withdrawn; but heed that any more than this hour may cause harm to it and those connected with it, or bring about death; yet hold in mind according to its quality, and what disposition of ill health signifies by its pulse, and its limbs; then treat the wound and keep it still until it is healed, and let them be restrained now from moving as much as they are able.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 "If you doubt the incision of the abscess and let it bleed if necessary, after washing or bathing with water or sunlight, cauterize the stomach and liver separately after extracting the abscess, as I said earlier.
de l’estopement de la verge	 "Shutting off blood flow from a vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 No one is born without a pulse in the artery, or it is weak, or not present at all
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 "If necessary, cauterize with a very thin needle in this manner:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 "Then prick or pierce the needle with a very thin needle, tie it and fasten its end in this manner: if necessary, make urine by doing so, first shut off urine, then tie up the urine tube securely and seal it; but beware that urine which comes out may not be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 "The part of which was cut off is now healed completely.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 "The parts that are not cut off in their place remain painful because nothing grows where the opening is at the base of the foreskin, so they cannot urinate until they stretch it upward; and they cannot stand due to this matter which makes them sick, and it's a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The method of the procedure is that they should stretch their foreskin and anus in a way as long as an arm, if they are ready; and you must guard against recurrence because it comes often, and if there is itching from what itches at the wound, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 "The pustules of the foreskin
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many times come in the way, and it is an appearance of shame to her; and when I am bad or good; if you please to bring a small knife, and cut them up and eat all, then put on salt water in the wound Egyptian-style; then cure by washing as long as it remains sane.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is malignant, bring pus and drain it out, if you please to apply a cautery
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 After you have cut it out, if the abscess is on or near a vein and has part of its peel and part of its fur, then apply the astringent that is closest first; when it is sore, if the treatment fails.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you have treated all separately, if there is any left of the abscess which has not been touched or healed completely, then apply the ointment made from the honey and flour that has been ground with the kernels of wheat and barley; and when it is sore treat it with other ointments until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is a lunar cautery prescribed, then follow this form of application:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The lunar cautery has two forms of application: first, to apply it in the course of injury or inflammation, and second, to extract the arrows from the wound, after they have been inserted there by the patient or the healer.
de la circoncision	 circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 circumcision is not a continuous practice like other wounds; in fact it is only performed on infants and should be done with utmost care and diligence to ensure the best possible healing process and the least amount of pain.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 "I say that they did not circumcise their children, as they do not use circumcision in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 "I have heard of many masters and physicians who did circumcisions often and with great force, and they did so with such pain that the patient's body would tremble violently.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 "Or the recovery is prolonged and it doubles pain as well, making it so that only one limb can be moved at a time; and the movement of the arm or leg by chance may cause great harm, and many times occur where they are not used to such movements and I want.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 "From the movement that is made with great force throughout all the length of the incision I find the beauty of the experiment, as the forces cut so well through flesh as through bone.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, if it is held tightly in I way without tension; but that the fingers are properly aligned on top of each other; and if mannerly done as an infant would do when he holds onto something tight, such that only one finger grows at a time until they all grow; then let go of your hand gently while holding steady with both hands to avoid injury.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 "The form of force used for this is as follows: the two dislocated joints should be loose and stretched, and they should remain so consistently.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 "The error of the procedure is that if the veins are cut during the manipulation; it is recommended to hold your hand over their incision, so they cannot move while you perform the treatment.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 "And if they reach the third joint and it becomes inflamed while the patient is still holding on to their base, then gently release them as soon as you can; do not remove any part of the vein, or else there will be harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For when the sudden pain of powdering occurs or in treating powders, and one is careful to measure out thoroughly, it will go away on its own if there's no harm done; for as we have said, as long as you are cautious.
dou retenement de l’urine	 Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 Retention of urine due to stone formation in the bladder or other causes such as congestion, swelling, cramps, or similar things mentioned earlier on in the division; and the urine is retained because it cannot flow naturally, so you see the retention at the base where the urethra comes out, if necessary cover the glans with a condom that fits snugly. And if not there should be extraction using an instrument called "siringue" which can extract the urine through this opening, but gentle care must be taken; and it is advised to avoid painful stimulation as much as possible so as to minimize pain.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 The urethra is to be lubricated with oil or butter and linen thread, so as to open it up gently at the base of the glans, then tie a knot in the thread; after that, lubricate the urethra once more before tying it closed tightly around the vessels, ensuring no blood is lost.
des maladies de la vessie	 The treatment for this involves evacuating the blood when opening up a vein
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When sores or wounds come in the urethra, it is gathered together with compresses and medicaments; there's an instrument called 'Clepsedrum' used for this purpose.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 She is closed, and if it pierces through: either from one side or the other as you see; then close her by covering them with such medicine that they stop well at once, so long as moisture is present, and to prevent further movement of any kind. If you cover your medicine in urine, put a cloth on the ear to catch it when it falls; if you pierce through water, apply pressure quickly. If you pierce through water and into her, then she will come out now with great force, so that they may feel pain; this is the way to clot the vein:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 It is from the vein or artery, and it pierces through high up; at one side or the other end; then take a sheep's bladder and place water on its surface to clot the vein by making a double knot in order to tie them tightly around her neck when she comes out with great force so that they may feel pain. If you do not have a vein, if you take a piece of cloth and make a circle around it, then tie it firmly into those places as is done for the veins; press your hand tight until the water flows from the vein.
de la piere	 at its base
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 In this division I mentioned the methods of incision and extraction for abscesses and stones. And in distinguishing between different types of wounds, and when each type requires a specific kind of treatment, and in draining fluids from the body's vessels, and at the edge or verge; also I will clearly explain it briefly
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 I say that the abscess is in the vein if it comes out before others, and this sign means to drain from the edge or verge of the body; also, I will clearly explain it briefly.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, if it is first to remove the abscess by clipping, so that all of its contents are drained out.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 "The dislocation has never occurred.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Take the arrow by its ends and bend it down so that it points at the base of your thumb, then hold it steady with both hands, ensuring your fingers are not spread wide but rather together, as if holding a stick; then grasp firmly and steadily until you feel the arrow has completely passed through.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 If it does not fit through at all, if your second index finger is too short or weak, let the arrow fly free and aim towards where you want to shoot it from.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Command the minister to press the arrow into his hand and command him to extend both ends of the quill upwards in his stronger hand and tighten it against the skin where one usually makes a cut; then he should pull back the feather-like substance from that side, as you describe.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 Between which there is between the heel and the base of the foot, it may not move more than at its origin; so if it is on one side or on the other, and if it reaches the tail, similar consequences will follow: if it is bent too far in any direction, it will cause severe pain and damage.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 When there is an angle and margin around the heel or between the heel and the base of the foot, if it reaches its limit, it will cause severe pain and damage: to prevent this, you must hold down one of the tendons that are like a rope at the top, pulling gently on them so they tighten the ankle; afterwards, you can pull up towards the knee, then pull back, and finally release the smaller ones if there are more than one.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 "And if she becomes big, it is advisable to apply more dressing.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 "There are two things that happen to the wound: either it dies or urine comes out in large amounts and causes the blood vessels to leak, but you can try to treat by tearing off pieces of cloth soaked with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, holding them down, and applying olive oil and cold water on top. Alternatively, you could apply olive oil and rose water as well.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After you remove it and if the wound is clean and dry, then apply a dressing of aloe and dragon's blood to stop any bleeding.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 "The abscess and its contents should be treated separately - the abscess can be removed by cutting into it, but if any urine comes out as a result of that, you must hold back any leakage from the urethra using this method: cuts to the abscess, remove what is inside, because if left untreated, this could cause problems with urination. After removing both the abscess and its contents, treat them together as best you can, bandage the wound thoroughly, and take all necessary steps to heal.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if you have done as I say so often, that is to stretch it many times, then excuse the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I've tried it before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 You should divide the angle into three equal parts, as shown here:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 First divide the angle into three equal parts and then draw a straight line from each of them to the base. Then gently pull the foreskin towards you while keeping it taut until it reaches its maximum length, or as far as possible. And finally, gradually retracting your hand towards the tip bit by bit, pulling it back towards that side where there is no urine. If any urine comes out, then press your hand down on top of what's coming from the base and hold it tightly to prevent it from going further in that direction.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken and comes out with urine, and you can't do anything else to prevent this from happening, then draw the foreskin back towards its base and hold it taut between your fingers, then extract it gently and remove any cold sores that are in the wound; continue doing so until everything stops.
de la piere des femmes	 Of the last women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 If the last woman is a virgin and there have been no other times of intercourse, then it is necessary to treat her with grief; also because of three things: one that the woman must be pure in heart; another that you cannot find women who are willing for sex unless they are castrated.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 The third way is if through chance you cannot find a woman who is willing for sex unless she has been castrated; the fourth way is that the last woman should be more pure than any man's wife and it must make them more profound pain, great fear too. And you need to do this because when you want to marry a virgin, and you don't find one, then search for someone who is also a virgin or ask her to become one so that the first time does not cause injury, and if she becomes one, but wants to keep her chastity, she commands her to hold it as well.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 "And she moves her thigh muscles gently back and forth from the entrance of the vagina to its exit point, until she reaches the root of the buttocks; then she inserts it into the anus with caution in that part; and does not move it from there or remove it at first, but rather leaves it alone for a while. And if there is a problem swelling up near her anus when inserting, she applies pressure to relieve it.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 "When knowing the issue (of the dislocation).
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 "And if she has trouble, when applying the fire cautery paste on her wrist and holding it there for a while until the pain stops; then come back later to treat the wound with remedies we have mentioned before in extracting from the arrow shaft.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 "When the heart attack occurs, as soon as possible, even if it is far away, until they are certain of death.
de hernie carnouse	 hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 Ramie is nothing but a mixture of water and salt, which contains the juice; and it is called "syfac," and once it has dried off cloth, if you take care that this should be another piece; and it is by mixing between the white syfac what we have said; and this does not occur.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 The generation of this rash will be if it contains impurities, and the matter is expanded
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And once if comes from the impact on impurities, and this moisture has many colors: either it changes color to green or black or blue or red and so on; and these are the signs of such an assembly, as when white syfac is mentioned by us, then it opens sores because it contains moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 "If there is moisture in the actual place where one's arm enters into it, if it is on the surface of the vein and under the white skin, when it feels good; until you know the color of the moisture, if you probe all around inside, whether it is on or off.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 "Once you are inside, judge what is denser.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "As the minister approaches your body from behind and above one shoulder blade to another, he will apply gentle pressure in order to stretch out any remaining wrinkles; after this is done, you should place the bandage over it tightly while also leaving some space at the back for a better fit of the skin; then fix the wound edges together securely without touching the rest of your body. Do not forget that every touch must be made gently and precisely so as to avoid infection.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 And if you discover another illness while attending to the previously mentioned ailment, make sure that you bind up and remove the veins in question as quickly as possible, then extract the affected part and apply treatment as per our instructions.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if it is assembled into two parts, treat them as such that they are separate; if you have treated the first part in the manner we instructed, then remove this affected part and place raw meat on top of the wound with oil or fat, depending on whether it is from a goat or sheep. Then apply more layers of cloth wrapped in oil and fat to cover all parts of him that were injured as described above:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take the two cloth pieces and sew them together in a manner so that they form a collar around the neck of the beast, with one side going to the front of the backbone on one side and another side going up by the forelegs; and the other is put onto both sides of its head. And all these parts are sewn into a single piece, creating a band around it in a manner such that you have described above:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 "And keep the wound away from everything except for ointment, and move it gently to prevent movement until it heals. And if you see any pus or discharge of wounds, then treat them.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 "And if the wound should become painful or severe, apply cotton to soothe it and keep it clean until it heals completely; then bandage any open wounds with a dressing that seals all around for easy application of ointment.
de l’aposteme des coions	 The elbow joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 In the part of this chapter that fills you with more fear, as I believe it is worth knowing its nature and functions too.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	 It comes from a place where many veins come out or course, and especially in the case of the arm
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is important to know how the vein bleeds and swells, depending on whether it is struck or not, according to the veins' color; and there is no pain experienced unless there is a blow of the vein, or a bleeding from an artery.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is due to no artery, you are struck by the dislocation of the joint when pressing at its two ends with your hands; and must not touch it further.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 The sentence "Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine" translates to "The vein inflammation is caused by the expression of two touch points.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 "Si li uef est aers au syfac" translates to "If the vein is dense in this area.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 "Si li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier" translates to "If the formation of the vein is at or behind.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis" translates to "And when your wounds are healed...
de l’aposteme des coions	 Of the veins
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 "This is a dislocation similar to that of the shoulder joint, caused by the loosening of the ligaments with the softening of the bones, and it becomes painful as soon as it occurs; and its cure must be done with great care like this one before you, so be sure what they did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 "It is important to apply pressure to the affected area with all your might until you feel it stop moving, then release some of that pressure gradually and steadily on each vessel separately, so as not to damage any of them; for if one does not hold fast to its position during an incision due to injury or weakness, they will be unable to help.
de la routure dou syfac	 "The dislocation has occurred.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 "The dislocation is due to stretching or pulling of the ligaments that connect the joint with one of its bones, and this results in a twisting motion as it tries to expand within the abdominal wall near the angle.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 "The signs indicate that the dislocation is due to stretching or pulling of the ligaments connecting the joint with one of its bones and can cause sudden pain as it tries to expand within the abdominal wall near the angle.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 "In no case is it accompanied by bleeding from the intestine and is held in place until swelling causes great pain to occur near the angle.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And for these treatments of iron, because it is convenient to escape them
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the manner of the treatment is that you should command or the patient to make a wound at their buttocks with iron and let it heal well. If there are any stitches in the wounds, gently pull them apart as much as possible without tearing; then apply salve on all the skin around the wound, so that none of its parts can move, until they start healing.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 "And no one has been burned since we said so after incision due to doubt of improvement in healing.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 "And this often happens, and let it go as long as he continues to follow our advice; if the abscess is slow in healing, use a hot compress like we advised, until the wound heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia carnal
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this vein there is no one who can make a treatment using iron or fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the earlier said that it should be done similarly to how you tie the laces after loosening them from your leg gently and then treat it with mild heat until the wounds are healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 No bleeding occurs when following our instructions for the treatment of hemorrhoids, and you tie them tightly between your hands as we advised, after loosening them gently from your leg; then treat it with mild heat until the wounds are healed.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you prick at the hairs if there is a wound to heal completely as long as it exists
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The heat cure is painful and there's no appearance in the process, and the sores are treated with care in this way, and more people get better.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 Of the relaxation of the hair on the arms
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 There are many times that the hairs on arms become relaxed and soft because those hairs that are dense are softened too, so it is easy to see; also it is easier when one sees a cure done for a sore near its back, and copes with the hair which is softened near the natural skin; then tie them together in a seam, and you will see how fine this shaving of hair may be on three or four seams, depending upon whether they are firmly tied; then cope between the seams, so that it can do as well as other wounds until it heals, and continues to shave hairs.
dou chastrement	 In anguish
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Our law requires that I not speak ill of this book and its teachings; therefore, let me respond to inquiries about it only in writing, or in the second manner: asking questions as we have practiced with oxen and sheep, and other beasts
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 You can translate that to mean "Our law requires us to follow these teachings in two ways: either by attraction or by release.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the way of attraction we make our seat on a very hot fire, as long as they are moist and remain so; then draw them out gently with your hand until you no longer feel their presence.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Regarding the second way of doing it: you should harden your seat on a very hot fire as long as they are moist and remain so; then draw them out gently from their sheath with your hand, while holding tightly until you no longer feel their presence. And leave no trace or any subtle trace that is near the veins; and this method of cauterization is more merciful than one done by attraction because at attraction there is no bleeding from the bones, as for curing the wound it should be treated until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	 disfigurements
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphrodite is one of two forms in which the appearance closely resembles that of a woman with hair and no male genitalia.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 The other way is when it appears as women, with two breasts instead of testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 The treatment for both is to cauterize the infected parts, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, those whose urine comes from the skin of the scrotum have no cure.
de la tentigene	 The tongue
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A tentiform eruption is caused by the skin being too irritated to see clearly; and no woman has had it so great as one hand, and that is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is advisable to remove excess tentiform eruptions from your hand or finger, and handle it gently; and do not apply too much pressure that can cause the bleeding of other wounds. And another disease called "cow's mouth" arises at the mouth and tongue, where it resembles a cow, and because of this they were called the old ailment "cow's sickness.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is convenient for you to apply this treatment as we have suggested earlier, then please proceed with the incision until everything is in order.
de erratique	 Itch
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of woman is not pleasing to him or his penis is too small; and if by nature, accident, illness, or from excessive indulgence he has become such that it is, either in a subtle or excessive way, then it can be treated with a fine powder applied gently at night between the sheets, on the body, or wherever else.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If his testicles are swollen and painful, if he is in need of treatment for two days or more.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If his testicles are sensitive and painful to the touch, if he is in need of treatment for two days or more; then put both hands together, and have her stand behind him with legs spread wide; and as you gently massage them, keep massaging until the sensation passes away from them, and also make sure the testicles stay firm.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And it is difficult to breathe, if you cover your nose with a soft cloth like a blindfold.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The treatment involves a painful procedure if the abscess cannot be drained through the nose and mouth; then apply medicines such as dragon's blood, incense, and bundles of sweet-smelling smoke; after that you must lay on a large pad to prevent any sores from developing further; then lie quietly for some time until the pain subsides.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when the abscess comes to a head, if it is convenient to cover according to this manner, then you should increase your strength and exertion.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 Because the incision that is in the arm must not be touched
des emorroides	 hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings in veins that one usually does not encounter, and when they become large enough to be seen; I have mentioned the separation of them, their signs, and I will tell you about those who need treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 "The hemorrhoids should be tightened when they are swollen in the morning and do not feel when pressed, unless it is cured with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who have hemorrhoids at the mouth cannot be felt, those are unable to heal.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 It is advisable to put her in a cold place first and soak the cloth until it becomes soaked, then apply it to her roots and powder on the sores if they are bleeding or inflamed, as well as incense and similar things; after one hour, she should be washed with a hot water and vinegar mixture made from pomegranate bark and various other substances. Then mix flour with honey and put it on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if they are itchy, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 "No matter what you do, do not cause the patient pain or injury to their back and abdomen. Then take liniment made from either fresh pineapple juice or ginger mixed with grape wine, and apply it.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After cutting into the abscess and letting it rest while healing occurs, if any part of the incision becomes infected or turns red (indicating inflammation), then treat that area as prescribed.
des apostemes de la marris	 "The cuts made by this procedure are made from steel.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 "These are the same ways that abscesses heal, whether they're deep or superficial, fistulae, hemorrhoids, and cuts made into stones, as well as other illnesses I mentioned in my previous statement.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 "It is important to treat the abscess carefully when it comes out of hiding and you see that it has formed into a cut; at this point look for redness or inflammation, and if you do not notice them then continue to apply warmth and fire as prescribed.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Here is the translation: "Do not hold back too long when in pain, but rather move as soon as possible to relieve it; and if a wound occurs or there are two wounds, straighten them out so they're no longer moving.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Here is the translation: "When abscesses are opened and hands are moist, if it's convenient to apply fresh or dry cloth; and put a bandage firmly in place without causing any harm as long as they stay clean.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 "And if the wound is healed but you still feel heat, then be sure to apply a cool compress as we have suggested in our previous instructions.
de l’enfantement	 "Instruction for infants.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 "The first aid for infants involves understanding the natural figure of their body and observing signs such as when a mother presses her abdomen downwards, it indicates that they are in distress. If an infant is crying but not hungry or wet, seek medical attention; if there are other signs present, gently press on the abdomen to quiet them quickly because once their stomach is distended with air, it can cause bloating and discomfort.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 "If the infant comes with any signs of distress to their feet, hands or belly, it is necessary to seek immediate attention; if there are other signs present such as colic or vomiting, seek medical attention.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 When the head falls off due to its own weight and the baby woman clutches tightly onto it, the virtue of that is weak, if she manages to sit on a saddle, or the women holds them; and because there is oil in it, or fenugreek is added, then the bile flows out between its two small holes.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And when the second one falls off, and it is washed thoroughly until all moisture from within has been removed; and tighten up her belly as tightly as she can manage to force out the fenugreek through with sesame oil, then squeeze gently and massage for a while, and hold her mouth and nose closed.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And when the second one falls off, if it is convenient that you gently press and pull them slowly; but cannot enter, make her sit on a stool, and gently lift her feet up; then place your hand under the ground, and hold her tightly until she stops moving, and close both hands as they are held together in front of her.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 "The child has suffered a dislocation at its ankle.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 "When the child falls with their feet first, it is best to lift them up and hold firmly in place while gently massaging around the ankle area.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 "When jumping with both feet first, command to prepare by extending your legs fully and then gently touching the ground.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 "And if it is not well positioned as we have mentioned, repeat the action gently and gradually aligning with natural body position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 "When it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 "And if it does not come as we mentioned, then gently massage the abdomen and back, and apply mustard and honey paste; mix thoroughly in mortar and pestle until they are well mixed together; put on the woman's body to apply for half an hour; hold her steady while she is applying and prevent any movement of hers lips or nose. And once it has been applied gently massage the stomach again.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 The child has dislocated its arm/shoulder
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the baby comes in this form, it makes its fists shake and tremble gently; then hold its head up with both hands, and pull its mouth forward so that you can see its teeth; if it's crying loudly, quickly place your hand over its mouth to stop the crying; and keep patting gently until you soothe it.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 The child has dislocated one arm out of joint
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 I suggest wrapping an arm in order to pull it back: if you cannot pull it back then have the woman lie down and put your hand under its head; if she cannot do that, hold her wrist and try to straighten her arm; finally make sure to apply a cold compress and command her to stay still until the baby is quiet.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 The child was separated from its mother's side and held with both hands stretched out
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 When you have done this, it should be fixed firmly so that it stays in place, and then instruct her to move slowly and gradually, as we have said before, until she is ready to let go.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 Of the above method for everything else
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When the child is separated using this method for everything else as well, if it hurts when separating her from your side and she cannot be restrained, immediately remove the child, until you have placed him properly securely in a safe place, and instruct the woman to release him gently every time: unless he is held firmly.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the dislocation
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 wounds that do not heal many times and only once in three or two grow up
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And they are naturally healed once, as we have all said, unless there is an external force that holds them back from healing; and if there is nothing holding them back then they heal
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if it is very painful and the treatment as we have said does not work well or quickly enough then you should do something else for healing.
de plusors enfans	 more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 There are no more ways for this disease to occur when the blood measurement is done with glory and strength it can heal any of these wounds because by accident some things happen; so if you do as it is convenient.
de l’enfant mort	 of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When treating the corpse of a dead child or fetus, as I previously mentioned in division, if it moves no more, and you are restrained from using your hands; if it is convenient that you should examine her with clean hands, without any accident or fear of death. If she is lying on her back, let her arms be raised and legs spread out; then anoint the forehead with two parts, or place a pillow under her head so that she does not lie flat when being washed off from the child. Afterwards, wipe away the oily secretions with tallow and rue, and oil your hands of these oils and grease, then apply them gently to her face, eyelids, lips, nose, chin, forehead, temples, or cheeks; and it is convenient for you that she anoints the cheekbone on this side as well.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 For the fire cautery procedure, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If one part of it becomes inflamed and swells up against another part or above the other side, treat both parts equally; if neither part swells at all, treat that part alone until it swells.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 If one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back into place through straightening, you must stretch it gently; then try to tie a bandage around its wrist or forearm, but if that is not possible, put it on the other arm instead.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If the dislocation is severe and it comes out of place, or if there are large injuries as a result, you must stretch the joint gently; then apply tourniquets to control bleeding, hold pressure until help arrives; and if it swells in the stomach or chest area, tie the compresses tightly so they compress against the swelling.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if they prick at their base lightly, then it will be an irritation to the mouth of the mare
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 If they are inside the belly or thigh, then if it is necessary to remove them from between the fingers, hold down your finger so that you don't harm yourself as well; and when removing one of the other members, make sure there are no moist things nearby such as grass, and do not use harsh things on wounds.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if they are in the chest area, then you should remove them quickly without causing harm to yourself or others nearby; and if there is no way out through another opening, do not leave any of it behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, tell the patient what we have said to him/her earlier: "hold tight and stay still.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And a woman was in her belly when she had given birth, then she gave another to that one, and refused others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After the patient was taken away on the stretcher, he began to breathe heavily
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I called for help and thought about it quickly but could not hold back the pain.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I put on a strong adhesive bandage, wrapped around an arm, then after a few moments, some others came
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I wiped my mouth, as there was nothing inside it.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 If I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I wanted to treat the wound by applying pressure with both hands as long as possible and then quickly releasing it for a short while; and I didn't remember this chapter because when one master trueve an extracting thing, he should seek help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 "Bring the arm back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 After applying pressure and removing it from your eyes, then turn around so that you see the two sides.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 In every way, the corners should be more restricted and can be either wide or narrow; and also have a large mouth and the edges of the trees as well, with half a palm each; and in making the two limbs equal to that of the first one and second one, by about half a palm each; and this equality is established at the mouth opening when turning the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form is made of good or bad seeds depending on the resemblance between them; and it's like this: if you see one long finger with another large, then tie their joints so they are together in the arm, and hold its end between your thighs; then release your hand from all else tied, as you have unfastened your fingers gently, according to how much of a bow you want to make.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 This instrument is used for tightening and loosening, and its multiples uses are varied; and when you see it appearing, the more quickly the operation should be done, and higher if its quantity is greater.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 If you did not use this instrument when it was necessary, then there would be no escape from the necessity.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the second line is read to the child and they are asked to hold tightly onto their tongue and not let it go loose until it reaches this condition, then gently remove your hands from the mouth and nose. If she lets go of her tongue prematurely, do so with care
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, if they prick at their base and the eyes move, then hold them steady so that they do not move until they grow
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If she lets go of her tongue prematurely
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 If she remains after this treatment and does not improve steadily but gradually over time as the hairs grow longer, then it may indicate that the hair is being pulled out, in which case you should gently move them from left to right and back again, repeating this process slowly until they are fully extracted.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 "The mouth of the mistress is tight, so we have prescribed a cure with fumigation and herbs; and if that doesn't work as expected, make sure not to fall for it; but in case you are dealing with the mouth of the mistress, tie her down tightly and apply four-corner extraction; if she squirms or struggles, loosen up gradually. If she squirms out or struggles free, then come back when she vomits and returns; otherwise, as soon as she coughs up bad breath from the stomach and throat, tie it.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 "If you are following the simple method of fumigation with dry herbs, none of our ancient predecessors have experienced any fumigation of chestnuts and figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The form of the instrument when you are to fumigate the woman is such that it holds tightly the flowers and the second part, if this one is like this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it is like a snake to have the head covered in flames and wide open under fire, and sometimes with fumigation of the charcoal, having such intensity until they are extinguished, and repeating another.
de percier lou fondement	 To find or examine thoroughly
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The infant who does not have a firm foundation is easily deceived by someone with whom he makes contact in secret: if you arrange for him to make contact with this person secretly, and do not let him see their face, then apply ointment on the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that he will not move, tie a rope around him and let go of his hands, so that he does not try to move as long as the eyes are closed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 And never does a man immediately bleed from an abscess or incision; if you wish to treat him immediately, do so as we have instructed the patient with the rope of fire.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the fistula from the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistules that arise from the base are painful and severe when they flow out of the base due to moisture or separation between two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when the fistulation is recent, it may swell, become white or thin, and sometimes these fistulas persist; and are caused by what occurs when the vein makes ejection, and by chance alone.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And if the fistula arises from the bladder or its mucous membrane of the foreskin; and when it is caused by the joining of the vein with some part of the body, such as a finger or other part?
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And you know of the fistula arising from its base and not persisting; and it is that you stop touching your finger or base, and apply a small, sharp needle to puncture the fistula as soon as there is no tortuosity?
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if it has tortuousness, even if you touch a small, soft hair, as long as you feel the hair or the tent to your finger should remain; and if not sensed, and does not come with a sudden ejection, as we have said: those who will not perceive that. If you hurry too much to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula is present in the vein or channel of urine, if it jumps to urine and cannot be cured by medicine alone.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If present in the junction of the vulva, if there is a discharge from it to the left; if it does not have tortuousness and the cause of pain disappears, then it may be cured only by incision alone; and in these fistulas present no cure can come unless laboriously, and wasting of the flesh those who are engaged.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 "In the one who is both man and woman, expect hope for health through fire, as I have experienced, and keep your hands between their thighs until they are bent towards their belly; then straighten out your legs till you reach to their buttocks, and hold them in a tight embrace on your stomach. And put aside any pain or tortuousness that may come.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 "If the hairs on their base are bent inward, if you want to hold them securely with your fingers, feel around whether it is between your thumb and finger or the side of your hand, as long as they are bent; but if there is no longer a joint to secure them with, do not try to heal them.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 "You can try this treatment many times but it may not be very effective and there will only be a small amount of pain; but if you do apply the cautery gently according to the size of the fistula as mentioned, and hold tightly into it for as long as possible until its base burns off; then perform this procedure two or three times more while keeping the hairs steady so they are not torn apart. Afterwards, treat any other small holes with a similar treatment, applying pressure firmly and consistently.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 "If he is sane, it will do.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 "If he is not insane otherwise nothing will come of it.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 "And if there's a vein that isn't visible or the painkiller is applied incorrectly.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 "The fire cautery has two uses: the healing of sores and injuries caused by burns or from wet dressings as well as the treatment of abscesses.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 When restored, he will remain straight
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 If the fistula comes out of its proper place and is held down by both cords, it will cease to cause any trouble or concern.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If the fistula senses discomfort and is located in or near its proper place but cannot be accessed easily with fingers alone; then you should cauterize it as we have suggested, or if it can still be accessed through a smaller incision nearby to extract it gently from within using fine instruments; otherwise, make a larger incision close to where the fistula is located so that an experienced doctor may operate on and remove it.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And whenever you puncture a fistula in this manner, and it happens to have its base near the skin's surface, if then you apply pressure gently at its head as follows
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And when puncturing in this way, and to pierce the fistula all along it until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is near the edge of the base, then you pierce through to that point, and hold the head in place with a finger while you pull the other end towards the fistula's head.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not break off completely, if you pierce it in all ways as described, do not worry
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when doing so, make sure to treat the wound properly afterwards to ensure it remains healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the fistula is such that it extends into both parts and trenches, while on one hand no copes must be done because one cannot cope with this unless you know how to do so.
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids come in two forms: either they are internal and cause itching of the anus, or external hemorrhoids that cause pain and tearing at the base; some may be large and painful while others only cause itchiness and itching on a small scale, but all of them will burst through the skin if left untreated.  It is recommended to apply compresses soaked in soothing powders like those used for cauterization, in order to hold them still until they clot.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Here's a translation line by line: "If you wish to sew according to this manner: take one thread, and tie it into an awl, then draw the thread through the other eye, turn both ends of the thread back towards themselves, if they are even; and hold the thread steady while the needle is piercing the second part. Then remove all but two threads from the needle, if necessary; and let them out gently to the patient as needed, so that it does not cause harm.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 "Dry thoroughly before using any material or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Often there is bleeding from the bowels due to internal constriction; and when illness is old and treatment does not work
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If you want to sew at the end of a piece of thread or near an abscess that is not wet; then treat it as before until it becomes solid like before, and so long as it remains healthy, and can be burned; then continue treatment.
dou fremit	 The first sentence of the medieval medical treatise
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 The first sentence of the medieval medical treatise reads: "The flea is a small creature that bites all over one's body and goes off to find warmth; once it finds no heat, it dies and spreads throughout the entire body.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 The cure is to take an egg or a very pungent herb and place it on the flea when it circles purple, causing it to die instantly; then gently remove your hand from the flea until you have covered its entire body with the cure, after which you should kill the flea by removing its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if so, take a cure from iron or thorn according to this method and gently rub it against the flea; be cautious and keep rubbing until
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, gently apply the cure to the flea or do so with the fireman's cure; make sure both are applied carefully and pressed evenly until
de la forme dou clistere	 of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 Never to cauterize the ears or nose, unless they are badly injured and cannot be treated any other way; and in no case should these organs be heated so as to cause them pain or damage.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 And when treating infants who are weak and in great pain, the treatment is also painful.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of fire cautery for small and large wounds should be as follows:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 The form of fire cautery for small and large wounds should be as follows: if the veins are tied together tightly so that you see them, then prick through each separately; and tie one on top, and the other below, and if both medicines are dissolved, then tighten all the wounds individually until they harden. And when the medicine is dissolved, if it is necessary to apply a strong thread, then cauterize as before with a circle form.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And let the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and put it on the bald spot of oil or any other place where there is no fur; then bind the ends together with gentle binding; next let one hand hold steady while the other draws out the arrow, as long as he can see well, until he reaches a certain length. And if they sleep for an entire night, that is more serious injury.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And with a bellyache disorder and the medicine hastens to heal if the pain is severe enough.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And with a dislocated shoulder or joint at the base of the spine if it is applied gently as when you are young, and that's how to apply the delicate bandage on the skin.
des plaies	 wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 In that chapter we discussed the treatment of wounds; in another, we will discuss treatments for hands and medicines accordingly to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 "Wounds vary depending on how they are made, and depending on the type of wound or injury that has been sustained.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 "I will tell you the treatment for each type of wound, and I shall also explain how to treat simple wounds on the head or neck.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 "I tell you that for a simple wound on the head or neck, apply gentle pressure to stop the bleeding if necessary, and remove the broken parts of the skin by gently tearing them off. If they are large wounds, elevate the affected part above the level of the heart; provide them with alcohol and fat from meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Here is the translation: "If he cannot straighten his arm, whether it has been bruised or not, and does not drink wine nor eat meat, but only olive oil or vinegar to clean wounds; when setting on a wound, if there are abscesses, hold them steady until they are fresh at all their pain, and do not move as long as they exist. If the abscess is painful, if you set upon it, it will be fresh at its own pain, and does not move by itself, so that I'll tell you a bit after.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 "If the wound is large like a sword cut and similar things, and the veins cannot be tied together with stitches, if they are bound by glue or stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 "If the wound is exposed to bone and deep, and does not hold for long if it's covered with glue; then cure the wound with medicine, restore hard leather in its place of clothing, and instruct the patient to eat large pieces of meat as they test out and are cooked.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you pull or tear the flesh apart, and it doesn't stop the bleeding, then seek immediate medical attention as soon as possible
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light; and it's that you put this powder over them so they will heal
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 The way to apply the powder is: take incense and two parts dragon; burn three times gently, and then sprinkle it subtly over the wound, hold it steady while it heals completely and joins back together with all its strength; after that let it breathe well and leave it alone if it doesn't swell up; because you shouldn't use medicine until it is sane.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And once alone this has been done when there is no oil or fire the wound has not healed
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it has been applied and is well-liked but does not have the power to heal wounds or other medicines until he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the joint comes out with the wound and it is small, when he closes his fingers gently; I will tell you later after fractures of major joints.
de la plaie dou col	 from the wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If there is no difference between the joint and the other bone, but if the joint part has been cut
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But do not put anything restraining on it because the substance of bones is cold and its continuation depends on the brain which is part of the body; but you should use medicine if the cautery is gentle with honey and oil and other similar remedies in this way, as well as moist heat.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the wound is large with many bandages, then the treatment until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 "And if the wound is deep and full of pus with a large area covered in bandages, then the treatment until it is healed.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 "And if there are fistula or abscesses, as I said earlier in my treatise.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 "The wound from the lance or from a blow.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 "The pain is severe, if you look at the wound it will start to bleed all over,
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 "Use all sorts of treatments until it heals completely; if not, then surgery may be necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 "Depending on the location and size of the wound, different treatments may be necessary: incision with a knife or needle, burning the edges to prevent bleeding, or powdering the wound if it's too small to extract pieces.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Doubled hip displacement
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The abdominal double hip displacement is great and terrible and painful; it never leaves the intestines inside unless there's an intake of something, but when it does, the stitching becomes more painful and it can cause severe intestinal injury if not properly handled in time. There are multiple ways to perform a cesarean section: common ones involve the incision for abdominal surgeries as well as incisions for other injuries; all are shared with other similar procedures except for the appendix.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 When the injury is small and nothing from the intestines is necessary, it can be handled one of two ways: either by closing over the wound with stitches as we have described or due to swelling caused by the cold
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, wash in the usual manner: wet a cloth or wipe gently with a soft cloth, and you should wash them gently but thoroughly, covering every part of them; and whenever this happens, be careful not to pull or tear them while they are moist;
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling depart, if it is accompanied by pain and is inflamed inside, then this could be an injury; in that case, apply pressure to prevent further bleeding. The first treatment should be cutting off or removing what caused the swelling and bleeding, until there's no longer a necessity for that; and afterwards, cut into it: pierce through the skin if necessary but avoid breaking any vessels.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when a wound becomes larger and the intestines swell if you remove them according to their natural shape in their own way, then it is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When a wound is large and in the lower belly, it should be cleaned by washing the wound with its back towards you, raising your legs higher than your head; if it's in the upper abdomen, raise your head and legs higher than the other side, so that one side of the wound is higher than the other. And when treating large and shallow wounds, this method must be used as I described earlier.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 When sewing a wound that is small, hold the edges together with stitches; and when sewing larger wounds, you should make two layers of stitching so they are as close to each other as possible. And after making sure all the stitches have been taken care of, leave some space between the two layers depending on how big the wound is. This method of suturing allows for more control over the wound, and prevents it from becoming infected or coming apart due to excessive tightness around the wound area.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I removed his intestine then it took him 14 hours to recover, and he was cured afterwards
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They hoped he would die soon but it was a miracle that he recovered and was cured without any other remedy, because the medicine is only available in this place where no one else can find it; they applied honey cream twice every day until he got well
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Another way to suture is: take the needle and pass it through the layer of tissue you wish to sew up; when it has passed entirely through on one side, if that should happen at any point during stitching or cutting the thread, then you go back and make a separate hole in the other side as well.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second way of stitching is to join the two parts together naturally, and align their edges perfectly, so that when one part is sewn over the other part, it creates a seam where they meet; then sew each part in turn with the other part, creating seams on both sides as well.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 When the belly is sewn with two needles, or when there are stitches in it; and one needle should sew from one side of the belly to the other, as those who make clothing do; but if the stitching becomes too tight, then they must ease it by loosening some of the stitches on both sides.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 "When the wound is fresh with all its pain, so long as it remains intact and no external injury occurs, hold tight; but if an opening occurs, then loosen slightly in order to remove any foreign body present, until the wound closes; and clean the wound thoroughly like others, as long as it is healthy; and if you do not have medicines, then wrap tightly, for two days, until the second day when it becomes sane.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 "If you do not have other medicines and the wounds are simple ones, then loosen slightly with oil of laurel or rose petals, and wrap around the angles, and remove any external injuries; if it causes pain or bleeding many times over, then squeeze until it is expelled from within, unless it reaches the intestines. Otherwise, treat for a bowel obstruction, and seek help.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The small intestine is called the "young one" and cannot heal once it has been ruptured, and it's because of its proximity to the veins that this occurs, as well as by the subtlety of all the bowels, and approaching her nature near the heart.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if a bruise is pulled from the intestine as it heals; and if it's bruised and swollen or black, you must tie tightly the part of the wound which is black, so that no blood flows through, because there are veins and arteries; then close off what is between the liver, and put all the intestines suspended at the bottom of the incision until they are extracted and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	 from rupture to bruising
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is ruptured and there is a small wound, if one cannot restore it with any home remedies, because I found that many times wounds from an arrow to the stomach were fatal; and this wound was on the right of the stomach, became fistulous and became excoriated and became inflamed. I applied treatment as described above, and did not stop treating until it was healed, and I treated its ulcers.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 When he was tight, it was thought that the wounds would not harm in his belly and did no ill effects but rather good things such as drinking and eating better than before. But none of them knew when there is a small tear in the intestine, it must be held closed with this manner: first put the thumb on the top of the thumb, then put the rest of the wound on top of that, until the thumb was too big to fit through his mouth so he had to cut off another finger.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 When he ate something that tore through his intestine, there were no injuries to the patient and everything went well but it caused a large tear in one of the intestinal walls; therefore, they used this manner of stitching them together: First put the thread from inside the intestine into another thin piece of intestine through the needle hole, then sew the two pieces together.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 a fistula
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 wounds or abscesses when they are inflamed if it is called a fistula and especially when it is opened and broken open
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is very painful and can cause significant damage to the tissues if it becomes inflamed or broken open. There are seven possible causes for fistulas, including issues with veins, arteries, or glands; poor quality of treatment; corruption in medicine; late digestion leading to indigestion and poor health; and having an abscess that won't heal properly.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 "It is advisable for you to know how this fistula treatment procedure works.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Fistulas can occur in all the limbs of the body, from large veins to arteries and nerves, or to the spleen, or to the bladder, or anywhere else on the body; if they happen at any point in a member, then the fistula will also affect that member as well.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 All fistulae of this manner are painful to heal and not without labor and ignorance, if there is no other fistula that I have mentioned or you have heard about, then seek the cure for it, know its course as best you can, whether a vein or artery, or nerve, or spleen, bladder or elsewhere on the body; and if it is at any point in a member, then it will also affect that member.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 The veins or limbs should not be injured or damaged in any way, as we have said before; and if the vein is found to be blocked or obstructed, it must be opened up immediately.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If this is not the case, then you must be cautious and follow these steps: if there is an obstruction or blockage in the vein, it should immediately be opened up; and if there are multiple obstructions, do not leave any untreated; and if moisture makes things worse and causes harm to the patient's condition, avoid using those methods.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 If you don't want to risk further damaging the limb or joint, and if a large portion of the obstruction is still present even after cleaning it out (which may require assistance), then take steps like sealing an abscess as we have previously mentioned; and if doing so will help restore stability, do that.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 There was a young man of 20 years who suffered from leg pain due to something that came out of his chest, as long as the matters continued in his leg, and he was released from a big abscess, but no cause could be found for it. However, they saw him often over two years, and nothing else happened except that his leg grew weaker and weaker, and became red with bruises; and he had color like orange
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I bought a tent in one of these trips, and then questioned the patients about their feet, and found that some of them came into contact with each other at all points on the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I suddenly realized that [something], and in one of the trips I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted and perforated; and it appeared to me as though there were no other corruption unless this; and so I began to treat the wound with medicines alone, but could not hold them together; then I came back, and saw the bone clearly before my eyes, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and looked at it, and then left. But I could not stay any longer when I touched one of the bones and it fell apart completely, and then I treated them with medicines again; and he became sane and sound quickly, and no longer feared death as before.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood was sudden but complete, and it arose from the bone an arrow, and there was no injury or pain to speak of in all its parts, nor did the wound arise
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 When the bone is broken in any way as it may be necessary: tie one end of the cord tightly to the shoulder and then tie another at a larger point near the bone, so that you can pull gently up on it; put this knot around the arm so that if you break off the small one first, you will not unmake what has been done to the large one. Do these things often as you see fit, for many times corruption arises from such wounds
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 For the corruption of bones is often found in joints or parts thereof, if you break all off at once but one; then tie a knot around it so that when one breaks off first, what has been done to the large one will not be undone. Do these things often as you see fit, for many times corruption arises from such wounds.
dou feu	 Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 Dislocations can occur due to internal pressure or external force; and when you have treated the dislocation with medication alone, it doesn't help if one member is tightly held by another, which can cause severe damage and injury.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 If the dislocation occurs in one member and is not treated properly by holding it tightly to another, causing severe damage or injury; if you try to correct the issue after that, but cannot release the dislocated limb from where it was held (like a hand being trapped beneath clothing), then your attempts will be in vain.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 When you burn the hand, either cauterize or apply powder that restrains them; if it's pricked at its base, hold the eyelids steady so they don't move until they grow; for the dislocation of the shoulder due to moisture, reset it first and then bandage the limb firmly.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 There is no occasion for concern when the flesh burns gently and does not cause great swelling or disease as long as it doesn't burn to the bone; but if it is too harsh, it will cause harm such as first-degree burns or blistering, causing diseases like fistulas (open sores).
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 Here's the translation line by line: "When a bone is broken in half, if you don't immobilize it immediately; and when you do not hold its skin tightly as you view, if it appears to be leaning that way more than anywhere else, correct it gently at the lowest part where it was, because once a bone is fractured, do not let it bend or move otherwise. And after applying conservative medicines for healing, remove any other dressing and clean the wound; then apply strong pressure on both sides of the injury as much as possible in order to hold the bone together tightly, and don't leave room for any gaps between them; and take patients who are suffering from pain, and if there is a splinter or something inserted into it, remove that too. And after morning or evening dressing changes, if you see another bandage sticking out, remove it again.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 "And if it happens to get inflamed after a long journey, they may not heal properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And after many strokes, if your health worsens, because the condition approaches its end.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 "And it can cause inflammation in wounds and sores that do the opposite.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the arm
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 The elbow joint is a hinge that connects the arm to the body, or between two bones in the forearm; and when it is extended, and one does not hold steady, as soon as the elbow bends, they run and extend outward until they reach the end of the bone, and thereafter all. And it causes dislocations at the bone, as long as there is pain present, and is accompanied by two large joints, and by a feeling of coldness.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have described in the division and the treatment does not provide relief, then consider that you apply heat to the joint, and afterwards cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cauterization is of great help if the joint and arm are healthy, and the elbow is sound; and by pressing it gently and steadily towards the hand, and making a slight turn upwards, you apply heat carefully and moderately, and put on burning and corrosive medicines at the remaining part of the burn after, to heal completely.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 "The bone is corroded from within, and it hurts when touched, as much so the other is corrupted too, if you touch its base while holding them steady, then pain will follow for a long time. If corrosion occurs in the bone itself, then treat with haste; do not let it go untreated.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 "The pain caused by the infection is severe.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 "The two joints that are dislocated frequently are often painful and sometimes cause damage to the bones; there may not be any swelling or bleeding in the roots of the joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 "Whoever dislocates the two joints should not move them around; but if they do dislocate a joint, it is necessary to reset and align that joint quickly; if there is significant pain or swelling in that joint.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	 "The root of this issue, if you understand it correctly
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For those who have it or cause it due to injury, if you do this correctly from the root of the issue then treat it as long as its healing
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 "The others come together due to birth wounds or injuries or by the extraction of fire and similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 "If you treat that sore correctly and according to its natural forms then let the wounds heal between two bandages or cloth with oil so they don't stick together; or you can put them between pieces of thin cloth tightly if it is sore as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 "If the wounds come apart from one another with the hand then treat that one correctly as needed.
des vils	 of harm
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 Those veins are large and full of excesses melancholy-like, which come into contact with the two sides of the body more often than others do; and it is in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things that others do as well.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 It is important to avoid purging once every day, but instead have a bowel movement daily.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The cure for a burn is in two ways: one is to apply cold compresses and treat the black scab that forms; and another way is to tie off the vein that runs through it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The way to cut off the vein is this: apply a hot iron on the foot for a long time until it burns without being subtle, then tie off the vein at its junction with the skin; after applying cold compresses and treating the scab as you would normally do, cover the wound in one of three ways large enough so that no further harm can be done to the vein, or leave the open wound uncovered.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 This passage describes a process for applying a cautery to treat various conditions using fire. Here are the steps: 1) Instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and even, especially if they have been burned by fire or other agents that cause burns. 2) If the hairs at the base of the patient's skin are pricked (touched), hold their eyelids steady so they don't move until the hairs grow out.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 "And when you force it, make sure not to hit it too hard.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 "Do not cut too deeply.
de la voinne civile	 Civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is in the legs or warm parts where there are no hairs and trees; and on earth it has no moisture; and by chance this vein goes elsewhere than to the legs, and that's because its course leads through muscle and flesh towards the heart, between skin and bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 The signs of the commencement of this vein are that it comes in a very large inflammation to one leg, then tears away its skin and begins to rise up from inside like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the joint has opened, it should be held in place with a strip of cloth for half an hour and then released; if there is too much movement, apply pressure at its base until it stops moving completely; because if you cut into it, or cause internal damage, that can lead to illness. It's important that this be done slowly and gradually over time, without leaving anything behind, using only the most gentle of medicines.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And in any case when it comes to joints that are closed, but open at the same time as an abscess or injury, and there is much pain and discomfort, then you should follow what has been described before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Between the shoulder blades
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "shoulder pain" in our land because it has often afflicted people and goes up and down the body, causing great suffering among members as they reach or move, whether from heat or cold sores, scabies or belly, doubt of its malice prevails; for when it enters through the body, it rises to the head, comes by oil, then retreats and destroys the oil. And this often happens
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see the cure and treat it carefully: if unable to go on as when he went before: If necessary put a bandage around his chest tightly so that no blood runs out; and if he pricks at his base hold steady your eyes, preventing them from moving until they grow.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 "The pain arises from sudden movement
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This illness is called 'vaker' in our land and causes pain to occur in any member, causing movement from one member to another; and I understand that you are saying this.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I appealed to a woman who had been ill and discovered that her arms were weak and she had a small swelling in both wrists; and after some time the swelling spread throughout the body as if struck by lightning into one arm then another; and she told me that she was getting tired of the pain, as she saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I grew worried about her because I had never heard of such a disease occurring in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Everywhere I wanted to see if they were experiencing pain from one limb to the other but I didn't witness it in this woman and pondered that perhaps she had exhausted herself due to her constant movement and the sores on her wrists; and as a result, they appeared constrained by what was causing their discomfort.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 "When you see this disease and its pain is unbearable as we have stated, tie the hands tight to limit their movement, cauterize the hand, if you do not see clearly with the eyes, if there's a cure for opening them up, if fat pills or feather pills work, and other similar things.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows can come from different places depending on their location or type of injury.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 There are different types of arrows depending on their shape and type of injury; some with points, small ones, sharp ones, flat ones; others with angles or tongues, others with pieces; there's one that hits any part without exception if it follows a certain way: if the arrow enters in the principle organ first, followed by the chest, heart, stomach, intestines, veins, and other parts.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When a member is detached from its socket and shows signs of death, I will tell you later what to do: if it's convenient that you remove the arrow because many die after several attempts; and when it doesn't show any sign or the arrow hasn't been removed correctly, if you try again but with caution and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And when the arrow pierces the skull and passes through the brain, and causes blindness, deafness, tongue inflammation, spasms of mind, vomiting, and loss of speech; and leads to death without warning, or by piercing the ear, or the nose; and it is followed by pain like a burning fire, and makes the wound white as pus; and when you see that he needs treatment, but cannot treat himself.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of the seven when it hurts or burns is close to the sternum bone, and so too similarly as being tied in a painful thing does not move freely; and by chance the seven must then come out like the others, and in the cold sore and fever, and numbness: there are no signs of doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 The sign of the eighth is that when a pimple pops or breaks open and pus comes out from it, the throat swells up, the mouth becomes numb, and the eyelids quiver with cold;
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And when a pimple bursts through the skin, there is great pain and great injury, and they move the limbs with the swelling.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the pimple pops from or into the stomach by chance then there is no food digestion;
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if a fistula occurs in the belly or womb, and it cannot be closed with surgery alone, then extraction of the fistula must also occur
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 And if a fistula occurs in the bladder and the urine is flowing freely, causing great pain; then it seems that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other member, including the arm and chest, neck and shoulder, elbow and spine of the upper body, forearm and foot, leg and similar parts are generally more flexible than others.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the fistula is in a nerve or artery and it is not closed, then I will tell you that I am in great pain because of this reason; what else should be done?
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 He had an abscess in the root of his nose; I tried to drain it from one side with a needle but failed on the other side,
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 "And the sauce was poured into the oil and paper towel, then wiped off any excess, leaving only what remained on the tip of the brush, making it easy to clean up ears.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 "The sauce was poured into the Arabic towel in the throat of someone and it made the towel sound like a trumpet when you blew through it, making it easy to clean up ears.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 "And the sauce was poured into your home where it sat on the floor and you thought he had died; then when he passed out for a while without response, I took away the towel and soaked it in water to soak up any excess, making sure there were no accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 "And if you poured the sauce into a home where there was a deep cut and it was soaking through to some extent; then removing the towel caused bleeding as well which would not stop on its own unless there was external pressure.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And if one man gets a wound on his face, he suffers great pain; and others also suffer similarly.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And if one man gets a wound on his face, it becomes swollen and looks disfigured to the right side, and is all healed after three days;
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If the wound is very deep
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I applied gentle pressure and felt nothing, but heard a popping sound and pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the abscess that caused it so I applied gentle pressure and felt nothing but heard a popping sound in his right ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I applied the poultice gently and quickly relieved the pain and made his wounds heal, making his nose bleed less as he felt the abscess drain away; and it was done.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 The patient was treated with corrosive medicine by applying it to the sore until it was healed, and then opened up the wound in order to expose its internal parts; and he dressed and sutured it well, so that it would heal properly, as long as the stitches were well made according to this form which came at the end of the chapter, while holding it tightly, and remaining by it.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 The patient was troubled because the cartilage at his nostrils could not be restored; it was healed and the wounds were completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have mentioned the quality of the extraction of some arrows because you asked about it; but since your book cannot hold on to everything that happens, masters must perform their duties and follow what is present and failing, for every work has its end and flaw, as well as strange things which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I declare that veins do not enter through the limbs or they are closed from this manner: either from above or below; and if one enters through another place it is a wound that comes into view, and no longer any time afterwards.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 If it does not move now if the hairs are prickly and rough against itself, and also if it is closed in bone, and cannot be opened even with many efforts, then leave it as it was; but if it moves after that then stretch out its place gently
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the abscess is closed in bone and also towards one of the ventricles or some other accident I mentioned earlier: if you do not kill it immediately but leave it as long as it stays still afterwards, because this abscess comes from there, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 "The wound is not to be closed until the bone alone, and it does not want to move around at all, unless there are no injuries in the area of the injury.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If it is completely closed and cannot be opened further, if the surgeon orders it, as I have said; then heal it while it remains sound.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 "If the wound is sewn up in such a way that it cannot be seen from outside, if she wants to take care of all of it; and if you sense any discomfort or pain anywhere, then treat it immediately, whether inside or out, as long as there are no nerves or bones exposed. If it breaks or tears the ears off while stitching up, do not break or tear them yourself, but rather leave that for when she is sewing her last stitches in; and be delicate with your stitches so they don't break.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 "If you do not hold on to it once it is separated from its base, then let it go because the pain will be severe.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 "If the incision into the nerve and vein is not done properly, or if you do not grasp the arrow as it comes out quickly, too slowly, firmly, or gently; hold on to the wound according to its shape when it hits your hand, because this will cause more pain than necessary. If you let go of the wound at that moment without holding onto it tightly, there will be even more pain.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 "The arrow that comes from another place or does not hit anything at all, or the arrow hits your limb in a strange way so you cannot see where it came from immediately; then hold onto them tightly while they can be taken out later.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is held in the bone, if you strongly turn your hand towards it as much as possible while it enters into the bone and extends the bone, then break it
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot be extracted, if you leave her alone and then restart the extraction while she is still within it. Then apply pressure to prevent the arrow from entering the tool's groove; and then release, so that the arrow has passed through, in order to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if it's stuck inside, ensure you apply firm pressure to the wound or vein until it passes; then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrow is in any of the belly, anus, urethra or vagina, and it protrudes outside, then you must apply pressure until it passes through; after that treat the wound as needed; and do not apply pressure to the vein or nerve, but extract it immediately; also make sure to clean the wound thoroughly.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 They are shaped like tendons from which the veins extend to their heads.
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 And they come in various sizes - large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the vein.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape at its base is similar to that of an arrow's point, when trying to pierce the vein by the tip of the needle.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the veins for piercing and for sealing it as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins in both arms.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 Common veins that are in the neck and chest - one on each side of the ears; and two arteries which are visible at the temples; and two veins that are under the arms, called 'veins of the elbows'; and a vein at the forehead; and veins at the base of the nose; and veins below the mouth, called 'veins of the jaw'.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 "The veins which we commonly call the cephalic vein and the basilic vein, are found in the elbow; they are called 'arm of the chief' and 'arm of the head', respectively; and the basilic vein is either on or off the right side of the body, and it is called 'arm of the belly'; and it runs down from the scalp to the belly. This is what we call a cephalic vein.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 "The jugular vein is between the auricular and ulnar points, but in the arm and leg there are three veins: one of which runs from the elbow to the shoulder, called 'arm proper'; another on the other side of the neck, called 'vena cava' or 'great vena cava', depending on whether it runs directly forward; and a third vein is in each thigh.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 This sentence is asking you to translate the following: "The veins of the ears which aid in healing and remove it should be soft enough that they cannot be pricked at their base by a needle, unless there is significant swelling behind them; if this occurs, hold down your hand on the vein as tightly as possible until the swelling subsides.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 This sentence is instructing you to take care of the veins in the temples that help with healing and removing tears, making them soft enough so they cannot be pricked at their base by a needle unless there is significant swelling behind them; if this occurs, hold your hand on the vein tightly until the swelling subsides.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The vein of the front is as strong as the cephalic veins that are older and weaker, and inflamed, and ruptured; and the qualities it has are such that when they are torn apart, as long as the vein remains intact, then you use the instrument called "fooseur", which shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And put the point of it into the vein and firmly onto your hand or another thing, leaving space to allow the wound to bleed according to the amount you saw; then let off the instrument from the wound, hold the vein tight until it is whole and never once allow any more bleeding in a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And above all, it is not convenient for the flames to be too high or the vein itself, because the vessel is narrow and by chance breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The veins of the second arm also help with them, and to draw blood from them, and to rupture them, and in cutting into oil wells, and similar things; the qualities of their health are such that when they are torn apart by any means, like before; then stop it, and let the vein be one piece, a little bit of flame, but not too large.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 And if you prick it lightly, through chance so hard; then do bleed, as much as you can, and then bind the wound tightly, and tie it well
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein's health must be considered carefully, as it is important for the vein to be healed completely, and if the wound is not properly bound tightly then bleeding may occur easily.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The health of the veins must be carefully considered when removing arrows or performing other medical procedures, as they may cause damage if not handled properly. Additionally, the veins should be treated gently to prevent any further harm and ensure a quick recovery.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bile ducts from the liver are important for digestion and can cause severe damage if ruptured
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 The quality of bile is to be seen in front of you, and hold its flow so that it doesn't move until the liver has been opened; then open the liver, and look at both of them closely: one on the right liver and another on the left, and note their colour. If they are black, then you should know there is a problem with both of them, especially if one is much bigger than the other part, and it also does harm to both veins that are in use and those outside; this way only works.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 The bile from the gallbladder is important for digestion as well and can cause severe damage when ruptured.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The bile from the gallbladder is important after cephalic bypass surgery and it goes into the stomach; it causes ulcers in the mouth as well as ulcers in the throat; and the quality of bile should be observed between your hands in front of the sun, with a view to observing its colour: if one or the other is black, then you know there is a problem with both of them, do not ignore this too much, because they are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 "The veins that are cut into should be carefully and properly made in order to avoid any injury.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The cautery method of making cuts is known as a flame cure. It produces wide wounds if done improperly.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And the olive-colored flame cure is preferred when opening veins with clear, large visible abscesses and those that contain large abscesses and complications. It's also known as the olive-colored flame cure.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more subtle when cutting into veins that are slightly inflamed or have small, hidden abscesses.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The injury of the lower vein is one type that may cause damage to the throat, ear, and nose, and abdomen; it is recommended for healing that he should cleanse himself thoroughly, and avoid areas such as the artery which is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if it reaches the artery and there is bleeding, then let's bandage it quickly so that it doesn't catch fire.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 If the base of it does not open clearly when you try to extract it and there is bleeding, then bandage it quickly or change bandages if necessary, or do nothing at all unless you wish to remove the vein from its arm; it will open clearly; and hold onto the flame as before.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 If you see that the artery is near it, if it's necessary to extract the arm as before, then hold tight on the vein and bind the arm tightly with a flame; make sure not to harm the artery when you feel its base getting thinner, because it's an artery: do this quickly.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "You see urine coming out like that of a child, and it is red and subtle; so you know this is not from an artery: hold your breath for a moment, then lay down with both hands, then cover them to avoid any movement until they stop flowing; and if there is fear or panic, do nothing further.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	 "After this has stopped flowing, you should remain quiet and wait for any further symptoms or if the artery is reopened as they might reappear.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 "Take a fistful of fistulous plaster and apply it to both hands, holding them tightly as you've been advised; if the dislocation does not settle then seek immediate medical attention due to the risk of increased swelling around the injury.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein treatment nurse should assist the patient with severe burns by first cooling down their body using cold water or ice packs to prevent further damage and reduce pain and swelling, after which they will provide medical attention as needed while ensuring they remain calm and stable during this process to avoid exacerbating any existing injuries from heat exposure.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 If there is a vein between the two incisions, it should be left untouched.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The nurse should assist the patient in treating a burn on their forehead by first applying cold water or ice packs to reduce pain and swelling, then providing medical attention as needed while ensuring they remain calm during this process to avoid exacerbating any existing injuries from heat exposure.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 "In any case, it is advisable to ask for the lesser of two evils, and nothing else should be done if only one thing can be done.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know to be healthy is that health does not come from staying sick or avoiding diseases but rather by doing things in one of the three ways: it could be through diet, exercise and sleep; alternatively, it can also mean fasting for a certain period followed by eating healthily afterwards.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The healthy way that does not have a specific end but only when the disease is gone or resolved after trying for an unspecified period of time; and it's best to start children at around 12 years old, unless they are already carrying certain diseases from which recovery would take about four months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 "No one shall live more than sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 "And if some one is sick and wants to purge the intestines with a ligature tied around them so that they are not pulled out; but do not let the veins become empty or torn from inside as limbs will be affected.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 "When the vein is inflamed and when removing it causes inflammation in the veins, if there are too many wounds that close up immediately upon closing them due to swelling, then make sure you check for signs of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 "If the vein swells after it is first opened, this can be dangerous; so if that happens repeatedly or there is significant swelling of the affected limb, seek medical attention immediately.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 "If the patient's veins become inflamed and their wounds are opening up again due to swelling of the limb, gently hold it still with both hands but do not tie or bind it tightly; instead, seek medical attention immediately as this may indicate a more serious injury.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 "If you see the lobe inflamed and it does not improve with oil application, then apply a little oil to soothe the sore area as much as possible; after applying some oil, gently massage the oil into every vein so that you ease the pain; however, this may also make the sore area move around too much or be too sensitive.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 "If the abscess is large and occurs frequently when making an incision small enough that it can't be done again due to bleeding or bruising, do not apply any ointment or cream unless otherwise instructed by a doctor; but if you see something like this, gently apply nothing soothing or moisturizing.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 And many times it occurs to me and appearance at the base of the elbow: make sure you keep your hand steady while trying to push off the affected area if there is any indication that it may be painful.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do not include anything we have said so far in your translation, as you may do harm to the artery if you do this without knowing it; but by doing a fist press and then applying pressure for healing purposes until the pain subsides.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And treat every wound according to its size and the depth of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 And if the wound is black when it first appears, and let it dry as soon as it is red; and if you see a large one, let it dry until it is subtle; and if it is too deep, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And for the one who is light and sharp, and has expertise in extraction of wounds, you should make a wide incision, and also for the delicate ones; and for the weak ones, do the opposite, and you must heal slowly and gradually, and must perform the surgery carefully without hurting any nerve endings; and this manner of healing is saved from bleeding and cutting nerves, and it is best to not cut too deeply.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 "For a patient with cold sores, it is advisable to apply raw pomegranate juice gently three times or four times a day; if they are stubborn, if they heal in less than two days or more than five days.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 "And if they touch the skin after a sore has healed, it is advisable to apply hot compresses and a soothing syrup.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 "And if the vein is inflamed and sore another time, it's advisable to apply gently as often as possible until its virtue continues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 "And if the vein is inflamed and sore after the first one, it's advisable to apply gently for seven hours after the first one or every hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And who is to heal from another place if he must heal the second wound or the third one.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 And when there are many wounds to heal and they are neglected, do not neglect the second one in order to save it; if the fire cautery has caused a vein to burst, then hold the eye steady until the vein grows.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And when there is blood evacuation from a vein incision and opening an abscess, do not touch it with your finger or hand; hold the eye steady until it heals.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And you must treat the second wound twice if it is on one hand or another arm or any other part of the body.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The arm that was injured will heal more quickly because its structure is stronger compared to the arm that was not injured.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The healing process involves applying warmth to the affected arm with a hot towel or compress for about 20 minutes and repeating this every few hours until it heals completely. If you do not apply heat, but still have pain in that same limb, repeat this procedure as well, using cold compresses instead of warm ones
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The healing process involves restraining the affected arm by applying warmth to it with hot towels or compresses every few hours until it heals completely. If you still have pain in that limb but do not apply heat, repeat this procedure as well using cold compresses instead of warm ones.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 "And when you have treated the sore as much as possible, and if it is on the vein and firmly pressed down, and so long as it stays like that.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 "If you have caught in your hand the sickness of the mouse, do everything just as I told you before.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 "The sickness of the mouse is good for all diseases that are on the body, such as those from marriage and childbirth, and problems with the hair, and problems with the veins, and stones, and old legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 "The sickness of the mouse is such that it causes sores to be painful at any hot place, and frosts it when veins are frozen, and joints become painful due to cold, and legs may lose blood from cold; wherever or on the shoulder, as you say.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And if you apply a healthy dressing to the wound as described above, and use a dressing that is suitable for it in the same way mentioned before; and so let the flames remain still
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if you cannot remove it yourself, then apply a healthy dressing to the wound again, and leave it in place for some time longer.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And when healing begins for the first time, if it fails on the second try, as we have said before, then you must apply a different dressing to that wound immediately
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The joint dislocation of the shoulder is in or near the armpit area, and its healing process causes great pain as it occurs
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 The healing process is such that the veins between or near the shoulder become inflamed and strange as it occurs, so you must turn them in order to open up the vein; and if you succeed, then apply a healthy dressing over all of those parts, for it has been repeated many times before, and is done by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you do not close them immediately after opening or cutting the flesh, and towards the small second wound, and treat it with care; and make sure to close the wound properly and restrain the bleeding; now he is stable.
des sainies de ventouse	 veins
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Veins are made of sinew or tendon, or a combination of both; and venipuncture is done in either way: either by cutting into the vein directly, or by making an incision to expose it.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 The venipuncture is done in two ways: either by cutting directly into the vein, or making an incision to expose it; and this procedure for venipuncture if performed through the second way involves incisions on both arms, one below each elbow, another between the two thighs, and one above the knees.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And should the ailments come to pass or if they are accustomed, during the month's duration up until its end, then let them heal and cure as much as possible; for there will be such who when they have mastered it, will cease being troubled with it; and those who feel a lump of pain in their mouth, will loosen the tongue, and heal sores; and those who think it, see through it and pass away and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we observe these signs, and most importantly during the first three hours of daybreak, we command to apply the cautery after that time.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 Let the healing ointment be applied to the burn after removing all loose clothing; and this application should only occur after the evacuation of any cold sweat, as those with a cold complexion or who have burns, for they will experience great discomfort; and because it is not advisable that one should constantly apply it without stopping, nor those with freezing illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 "And those who are aware of this should be careful, for otherwise it is necessary to move the bandage a little further down due to the risk of injury.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 "The incision should be made at the base of the thumb and forefinger, as well as below the angle between them, for it is important to avoid any pressure on the arteries or stomach.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 "The incision should be made between the two fingers at its base, as well as below the angle where it is located; and it must be ensured that the patient does not press on the arteries or cause any harm.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 "The incision should be made below the mouth as it can lead to oral problems and throat infections, and is located in between the two fingers. And it must not be placed near any of the ears.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 Dislocations occur due to an injury or filling of space
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Dislocations of the limbs are often accompanied by pain in the large bones; and instruct the patient not to straighten the joint too much as it may damage nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	 A dislocation of the shoulder often occurs from the base and is accompanied by pain in the joints themselves as well as veins.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 Dislocations of the legs are often caused by injury to all parts of the body and cause great pain in joints, veins, urinary tract, and flowers; they also weaken the legs over time, making it easier for them to dislocate further down the line.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	 Sure, here is the translation line by line: "The manner of putting on a bandage is to put it on promptly and securely, remove any excess immediately, and fasten it firmly in place as you straighten out your limb, and keep removing until all redness has subsided; then fear not, and remove the bandages when the wounds are in good condition, for such there are those who have great pain, and many lose consciousness: if necessary do one thing only, and do a large amount of stitches, and make it fine; gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 If the wound is severe, then doing two things at once may be necessary: first, carefully open a large vein for access to the injury site; second, quickly apply stitches in fine lines to minimize pain and scarring.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 If the wound is very severe, then doing three things at once may be necessary: first, carefully open a large vein for access to the injury site; second, quickly apply stitches in fine lines to minimize pain and scarring; third, try and suture every tiny tear individually as you slowly close up the incision.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if one wants to extinguish the fire, then you must apply oil of lavender or any other aromatic oils to extinguish it.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if one wants to extinguish the fire and its smoke, then apply oil of lavender or any other aromatic oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if one has a tender and large rash that does not want oil to be applied but must wash after the steam from roses or cold water, or dew of morel mushrooms, or dew of cucumbers, or dew of porcelain, etc.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And those who have much moisture should first remove any irritants such as dust or mold spores and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 "And those who have too much of these, they may use vinegar or a bath with vinegar, or decoction of chamomile, or other such things; and it is not advisable to wash one's face before bathing, but after the bath an hour at most; and do not sleep immediately afterwards, but wait until he has rested as long as he needs.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 "And those who are cold and too damped should be careful not to become inflamed or overheated; if it is advisable that he drink cold things like greens and vegetables of the field, and similar things; avoid foods which are sour and sharp, such as greens and endives.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 "And those who have a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat light foods like greens and vegetables of the field, and similar things; beware not to drink too much as you might get sick; it is advisable not to wash your face with water or vinegar before bathing, but after instead, in order to ensure that the limbs are straightened out; be cautious so that they do not turn pale.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 Here are the sutures that should be made into the liver, and into the breasts, and under the belly button, etc., because this member cannot be injured without cutting it open, so as to avoid injury among members of one's own kind, like how we put on the stitches for an incision onto a member; if there is much bleeding or pus when the member is extracted from its place.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the sutures applied with fire should be as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 The form of the sutures applied with fire should be as follows:
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 Here is the translation: "Place a bandage around the limb, either using wax or lint, and attach it to the edge where it overlaps with the wound, so that you do not touch any of the hairs; then place it on the limb, and tie it firmly in place, as if you have mentioned before. If you see steam rising from the bandage, remove it immediately.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 "The bandage should be tight enough to prevent infection but not so tight that it cuts off circulation. After placing the bandage, make sure there are no tears or abrasions and only apply if you see steam rising from the bandage.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 "The bandage should be used only if the wounds are clean and dry from injury, as mentioned before. If they are fresh and tender to touch, do not apply them; instead, gently massage the affected limb. When the wounds become dry and ready for a bandage, then place it on the limb.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 "Don't leave the shoulder loose or it will dislocate again and cause further harm to the joint.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 "Once the wounds are sealed and have stopped bleeding, hold them tight so they don't move until they are healed.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 "The book begins with an introduction to fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 "Chapters on injuries are essential in the field of medicine and healing.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 "Here are the contents of this chapter; it discusses injuries and healing.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 "It is advisable that those who begin this book should first understand its purpose and learn the skills of the author before embarking on it.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 "When there is no doubt and fear, if you hold the hair steady at its base to prevent it from moving while cutting or removing an arrow.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 "When the dislocated shoulder begins to heal, if there is meat that moves violently or has viscosity, then cut it with a sharp knife and remove it immediately.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 "The head of the shoulder becomes dislocated.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 "The dislocated part cannot be corrected right away and may not return to its original position due to the nature of the bones or soft tissues involved, unless very young; but no cure is available, reset it as soon as possible.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 "Dislocations can occur in different ways and locations.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 "I will tell you about all the different types of dislocations in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 "There is one where it came out and another by straining, similar to how long you hold your breath when writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 "If there is a dislocation with an injury or a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 "In any way he managed his own instrument and prepared it for restoration according to what came in his head; and if the arm is torn at its base by whatever reason, then press firmly with both hands so that the muscles are pulled apart, and when there's no tortuosity or pain in the elbow, then there's no fracture. But he can well have a sprain, or a small tear.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 "If it is not convenient for you to move your hand now, but take hold of the remedies that come afterward, and then gently restrain them.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 "And for the fracture that occurred at a joint and separated its two parts, it is now convenient to make them heal together as firmly as possible, so they may unite if they are left alone until the healing process is complete; then hold them gently but steadily during the restoration phase.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 "The patient should apply pressure to the joint in question with their hand or hands and maintain it securely, so that if both sides of the broken bones are misaligned, align them through such means as you see fit, keeping in mind that by your treatment there will be no further damage done; and ensure well that any broken joints of the bone are treated according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 "If you think it's alright, do not overly restrain or press as much as those who cause the dislocation through their own way of performing an abduction and contraction; make sure to give attention to many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 "When the limbs are in place and it is no longer dislocated, do not worry or be anxious, but stay still, don't twist or move around, ensure that the limb feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 When there is no pain, make sure that nothing touches it so that it does not feel any pain; and hold tight if it is put back in place, straighten it out gently until it returns to its original position; the limb which has been broken will be like this as I have described it.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 The limbs that are broken can vary in size and shape, large or small.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 When the limb is small, gently apply pressure from both sides to hold it in place; if it's larger and more robust, use one large, thick band to firmly hold it in position while avoiding any excessive force that could cause injury or further damage to the joint.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if the patient has a dislocation or an abscess, whether it is a shoulder joint or an elbow joint, and they are inflamed, leave them alone; then hold your eyelids steady, as for long as you can, until they become less swollen.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 And it is advisable to make the incision a little larger and wider than the others; as for the size of the limb, either small or large, then hold your eyelids steady like you did with the previous incision; but if the eyelid swells too much, don't squeeze it tightly, because that would cause more harm.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 "And if the hairs are pricked at their base after the cautery, they will stay still unless they grow.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When a patient has an abscess with wind and the veins rupture, I'll tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And should one choose to extract arrows from the limbs, they must be broken at their first joint.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put them in stitches after one joint or seven joints at most; and if you take this confection with a little flour and make it into dough, knead well and thin, but not too clear nor too thick, use it and it is common practice for restoring fractures of various kinds, especially women and children, because there are no more than very hot or very cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 Another way to correct dislocations and rotations is through the application of cold poultice: apply ice packs in abundance, using a variety of materials; spread it over and cover the affected area with warmth, as this ointment strengthens the bones, heals fractures quickly, and helps to reduce swelling.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another way to treat torsion: apply mugwort and vinegar, mixed with hot water; cover the affected area with warmth as this mixture is soothing for the skin, and strengthens bones quickly, reducing swelling in the process.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to correct joints and ease the pain from them is by applying a new salve made of linen soaked in oil and cooked; cover it with warmth so that it may be applied over the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 "The patient must lie still while performing the procedure to avoid pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 "Another way of breaking bone is by using dry twigs and leaves from the ground; crush them together and apply to the broken part.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 "Another way to heal bone fractures is by using a bandage soaked in honey; apply it to the injured area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 "Take root of rosemary, chamomile flowers, violet petals and wheat flour, mix them together; then crush with vinegar, or water if needed, and apply to the affected member.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 "Another way of healing other than the first one, when the wound is more severe on the bone.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 "Take root of rosemary and linseed, balm, millet, and sansoucroix; mix flowers from violet and chamomile with them all together; then crush and apply depending on the severity of the wound or member's resting period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 "In the book of this chapter it is mentioned that when a limb becomes broken through restoration attempts using wax and oil, nothing else should be used in addition to that; as long as the flesh does not become too soft or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 "It seems strange that one should put on the broken limb to restore it, with something dry and hot like myrrh and aloe and incense-like things; as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 "Another way to treat an injury and pain is to apply mud and cut off the dry parts of the flesh, or prick with nails, and shave, and wipe it away; do this frequently, and break it up.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Afterwards the wound should be washed with a dry cloth or oil and then wrapped in gauze lightly as desired.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 "And if you see that the artery and vein are ruptured, and there is great pain and swelling, then I have healed all of this, and you should massage it gently to loosen it up, as long as you did what was first suggested.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 "If he does not respond to what we have told him within three or four days, and no longer after five days; then leave it loose for a little while, so that the member can move gently again.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 There are many ways to break
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many ways to break include percussion from a sword, and collide with the bone when it hits, like how he does it hard or fast.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 Or the spear pierces through the bone from behind or in front, and is called absolute dislocation; and there are injuries with large or small cuts.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if it has an impact inside the wound, or from behind, or with force on the back of the shoulder blade, or others similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is dislocation present, which leads to tearing at the place where it was done on the bone, or inside the bone, and this will cause an injury large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if a wound is placed inside the bone so subtly that it cannot be seen from outside, and they tear small, and this is called a capillary dislocation; and if the wound was made by hitting hard or piercing, or by sharp things, entering the piece of the bone at one side, and then moving out through the other side.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 "And when one has very young children and very wet hands, as can happen with small children; and it is accompanied by many breaks in the skin if so happens.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 "We know all ways of fractures through withdrawal and interrogation, as well as through the use of force.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 "The hairline is caused by when someone discovers the tumor and presses hard on it if there's a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 "In the treatment of the fracture, be careful around any sharp object and see if there's no bad accident; if you vomit or lose consciousness or have pain in your arms or legs, etc., these conditions may indicate doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 "If you don't see any accidents around sharp objects and expect to be fine as long as the treatment continues.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when you reach the first one to you, it is in front of your thirteenth month that you must stop
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if you hold it there before your seventh month, then its appearance will be ruined and many accidents may occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if you hold it there and tear out the arrowhead separately, then examine the bone thoroughly in all ways that you can, and find out what is wrong with the wound; after that come to a conclusion.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then there was a greater problem than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 The second method is to have many different sizes of needles, some thin and some thick, sharp and blunt, and in the process gently not piercing through the skin;
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 The third method is to have sharp and blunt needles depending on the need. Depending on if you're piercing through skin or not, either way you should use different sizes of needles with varying points so that none of them pierce too deeply into the bone, unless absolutely necessary; and this is one of three ways to perform the procedure.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 To perform the procedure you should take one needle and hold it firmly against the bone until you feel that it has pierced through; then remove that needle for a moment and continue with another, repeating this process as necessary, ensuring to not pierce into the brain or any other vital areas of the body, while gently guiding it towards its target.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 "And when you have cut the bone and treated it as instructed above, if convenient that you reset its strength which has been weakened by other cuts or instruments in similar fashion but more gently and subtly than others; and if nothing happens to any of the bones mentioned earlier, then we should treat wounds and injuries like those experienced.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 "Another way to approach this is to use the Galien's method, which involves applying a strong and harsh stimulus; but it can also be very painful, so take care.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 "First it is advisable to cut off a part of the bone where there are cracks open so that when you discover this part, if you apply the Lenticular stimulus as mentioned above, then which should be its form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 "Do not cut off one part and leave the other exposed if you can avoid it; but first make cuts on both sides of the bone, so that when cutting towards the bone, be gentle all around to prevent injury to surrounding tissues.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 The first sentence in English reads: "And if the arm is dislocated from its socket...
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 If you encounter very sharp razors and after more subtle ones, continue doing so until it's done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 When performing other hair cuts and dislocations of fine joints, it's important to follow the instructions as directed; this is crucial for those who have mastered this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the wound is superficial and you do not need stitches, apply powder to it directly before applying medicine with spices like turmeric, cinnamon, or incense.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 "Unless there is an injury to a joint, it will not dislocate.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you want to prevent dislocation, make sure the patient stays still during treatment and follow a specific procedure involving honey, oil, and gauze wrapping around their shoulder.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 The bones are very brittle and can be easily broken if not properly handled or moved around, so it is important to handle them carefully and only move them when necessary.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two bones is broken, you should immobilize your other arm and wrist in a way that aligns them properly with their natural position, holding it firmly while letting go only when they have aligned themselves correctly; and do this gently, making sure there's no pain from your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And when the break is in the upper part of his neck and cannot come to rest there if you gently place your hand on the base of the skull a short distance away
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in the second part and you try something else, but please restore the first joint as soon as possible; otherwise, after seven or ten tries, when the doctor's hands are applied, then pull gently on the base of the skull towards your neck, so that it may come to rest.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 Or if you try something else and the break is in another place, then it may be there; and hold tight so that they fill up both sides of your neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And there was no relief for the pain as long as the joints were held firmly in place
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It seems to be alright, but it's best if they are moistened with a mixture of flour and mill powder, then leave them as long as the eyes stay closed, and hold the eyelids firmly.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 And whenever one pulls the ear lobe due to tension, and if there is a seizure in breathing, hold tight the lips tightly together; otherwise you will blow out your breath
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And when it is time to vomit and you feel a contraction in your throat or chest, whether due to overeating or from swallowing something hot; hold tight the lips together
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when it is time to vomit and you feel a constriction in your throat or chest, whether due to overeating or from swallowing something hot; hold tight the lips together
de la routure de la mandibule	 From the passage provided earlier
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the mandible is dislocated and there are no wounds to heal, only cracking occurs at its base; if one tries gently to force it back into place
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 It is recommended to use your left thumb on the left side of the mouth and your right index finger gently pressing it back into place; for a dislocation in the front part of the jaw, if you press with your right index finger and force the dislocation gently, and then apply a dressing to the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if there is severe dislocation in the jaw bone, it is recommended that you administer a dose of two parts as often as needed until the dislocation returns to place.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And if the swelling occurs due to a thread of gold or silver wire, tie it securely with double linen and wrap another piece well made of cloth long and wide across the jaw bone; and place one more bandage tightly around its base as you command the patient to lie down, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 "As you see the figure changes if a dislocation occurs at any joint, and then reset it to its original position immediately afterward.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 "When dislocations are experienced many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 "If there is a broken bone and a significant wound, the surgeon should clean out pieces of the bone if necessary, with attention to small details.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 "And if the wound is severe enough, it may require expanding the flame according to need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After all the pieces have been taken out and there is no longer bleeding from it, if the wound is large, then add some more dressings according to need in order to start treatment immediately.
de la forcele	 In the morning
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 The dislocation is often seen in the morning, on the shoulder, and occurs in three ways: when it is broken off or detached due to weakness, when it is broken off but not completely separated from its socket, or when there are pieces of bone involved; whether it is the result of a simple break or one with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 If the dislocation is accompanied by pain when moved or manipulated as described in the previous paragraph, then you should apply ice to the joint area, and extend it towards one side; repeat this step until the fracture feels aligned properly, ensuring that there are no signs of deformity or movement left.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 If you've been instructed to apply ice and extend the shoulder towards one side with a wrap or line as mentioned before, making sure it is large enough according to your ability; gently stretch and hold the joint so that when you manipulate it, if done properly, no movement should remain.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you don't tie the head of the arm to prevent it from moving forward as much as possible, then hold its shoulder blades inward, and bend its elbow downward so that it can move around freely in all directions but not backward
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 And then apply the splint to both sides and if you find it necessary, hold it tightly in place so that it cannot move at all. But remember, if one of the incisions has become infected or is causing excessive pain despite your efforts
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And then take a spoon and try to swallow it all at once as if you were swallowing pills or medicine; but be careful not to choke yourself as this could cause injury or even death.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if he feels hot and drips oil onto the surface of his eyes or on himself and into them, it is important that he immediately stops this.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 In cases of dislocation, when the joint becomes loose and cannot stay in place due to factors like moisture or injury, it is important to apply pressure with something soft but strong on the dislocated joint while keeping it still, so that it does not move further out of its original position. This should be done gently yet firmly until the joint is reset back into its correct alignment.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 When the shoulder dislocation occurs and is not corrected within a certain time frame (not specified), the shoulder becomes unstable with X days or XXV days of healing; if the treatment is delayed, it must be fixed to avoid further damage to the arm.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And put a small piece of the bone in first and remove it when healed, as we have described for the dislocation of the arm's base.
de la brisure dou pis	 In the first sentence of this medieval medical treatise written in Old French around
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The first joint is dislocated on occasion but not often; however it can be broken easily with force.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle of a battle, if you decline to help and there are many wounds around, and thrusts at your cheeks as well, and pierces into the bone beneath them, and dies all together.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the restoration when it is that the hairs are to grow long and even again; hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la brisure des costes	 of the break in costs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 The stitches that break the costs do not move unless they are very old or after the back and head, and do not stop unless what they are hairs; and it is well known in the interrogation to be sure.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if the stitches have been removed as you say it should be done
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply the plaster and hold it in place with a bandage so that one is properly set.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And if the stitches of the costs are falling off at the head, causing great pain and distress, as well as many more deaths, because they see no cloth; and again to wounds, and thus and vomiting large amounts of blood, it is a great injury, it is health care, it was much engineering.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And if one of the things that say you should administer foods that inflame the belly to break the stitches from afar.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not harm it at all unless a stroke happens to it; if one occurs, then we must act promptly
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 If one happens
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 And when it is dislocated and moves, if the vein cannot be accessed due to poor positioning, causing discomfort; otherwise, there will be no harm done.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And when it is dislocated and moves, if the vein cannot be accessed due to poor positioning, causing discomfort; otherwise, you should lubricate the joint with oil or lotion so as to facilitate movement between the fingers, then treat for pain in the muscle tissue and blood vessels.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it will cause great pain if the bone punctures the skin instead of the vein, and there is a chance to tear through the joint from the base; and you must apply pressure, and then treat with ointment or other remedies so as to heal, even if it's large, then treat with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when the patient wants to perform an operation on his arm or leg, he should lubricate it with oil and then wrap it securely; and after the wrapping is in place as tightly as possible, if necessary, let him proceed to do what needs doing.
de la brisure dou col	 "To break (split) a collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 "No one has ever broken their collar bone and lived.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 "And when it happens to no one and you know whether he will survive or not, if you see his hands relaxed and limp and dead and cannot move them, and when you prick an arrow, do not let go.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 "The man is in a very dangerous situation and if he is restrained tightly but not to death, the bone joint is saved; and when the wounds are treated with care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And to know if it is sane or not, whether the wound is deep or shallow, and to see if there was an accident that caused it, and to hold down both hands tightly while doing this; and when one has sown it near his belly, if you do the stitching suddenly
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is sewn on the back and he wants to sit up, cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 It is deadly: do not try any more in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if an accident happens to them, then it's a less severe injury.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if the cure involves pricking at an abscess or applying oil to a boil that is red and painful, make sure it's done quickly while holding one of them steady and commanding the patient to rest; then apply a bandage around it, bind it with a cord, and order him to rest. Do not let him sleep in that part where he feels pain until it heals completely.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Here is the translation: "If any bone breaks, if necessary repair it with glue and bind the two ends of the wound together tightly as much as possible; and if a joint dislocates, you hold onto its thumb firmly, put one hand over the other's palm and pull gently so that both hands meet at the elbow, then tie the stitches and press down until the wound is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 "The fracture of the arm bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 "If the arm bone breaks, and if there is pain at the break site, apply pressure to stop bleeding.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 "The restoration is that you hold your hand tightly against the break until stitches are applied; and know where the fracture is located on the body, if there is only one, tie it as tight as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 "And if it is broken at its base,
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 "And when you put it back on the needle, then bind around with a strip of silk or thread, and hold the joint steady so that it doesn't move; and make sure all the edges are in place, as long as the stitches are tight.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 "Instruct the patient to lie on their back or stomach.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	 "And the abscess is drained when it comes out through the nose.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 The dislocation of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The adjutant is located between the upper arm and the shoulder blade. If it dislocates, one can restore in two ways: one by applying a strip of cotton to reduce friction as described earlier or another way:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 "Separate the two legs from each other and stretch them upwards as much as possible, then tie the wrists tightly together so that they remain still until it is time to release.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 "Another way to do this is by tying the hand onto the arm and instructing both hands to reach towards the same object that is suspended from their wrists, one at a time.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 "And if the extraction is particularly difficult, restrain one of the hands and have it stretch towards the object while restraining the other hand to prevent movement.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "If the dislocation is occurring in the shoulder joint, it may be necessary to immobilize one arm and have it stretch towards the object while restraining the other arm; then release both arms as appropriate and hold them steady until they are released.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 "The arm should be stretched out and held steady so that the shoulder is in its correct position. Then gently pull the elbow back towards your body while holding onto the armpit to keep it in place.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 "If the arm is not moving or if it is partially dislocated, place a larger and stronger splint between your elbow and shoulder to provide support and prevent further dislocation.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 "If you notice the arm is sitting loose or dislocated, then gently pull it back into place and hold onto the elbow to prevent further dislocation. Be careful not to force it too much as this may cause injury.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 "If you are referring to the earlier part of this text...
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 "...but if an accident occurs after three days or more and the patient experiences pain in their limbs and hands as well as stomach discomfort...
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 "...and it is customary that the patient's joint and leg should be reset after four days, unless they have any complications or further injuries...
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 "...and if there is stiffness or swelling that persists for more than two months...
de la brisure du bras	 "From the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 "The arm is composed of two bones: the ulna (the smaller one) that moves with the elbow and connects to it; and the humerus which are larger, and connect from above downward.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the finger joints are dislocated, the restoration is light, easy, and healing occurs fast, but when the large joint dislocations occur, if healing is poor or greater than when they occur together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only one finger dislocation occurs gently extend and straighten it
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 If the dislocation of a finger joint occurs gently extend it and straighten its wrist upwards compared to others, and let the fingers underneath touch beneath his hand more than others, so that the fingers don't cause any injury or pain; then extend both hands towards each other as well as one minister to another on top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then place them in their best position.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if there is a piece of bone protruding out when it is in its place, and you cannot remove it without causing harm to the surrounding area, then do not try to remove it at all unless absolutely necessary; as we have mentioned before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	 And it was with the bruise I went to the single physician; if he were brought there
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And at the beginning of restoration should be applied carefully if not too soft or too hard, so that both parts are well-lubricated and able to move smoothly
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then apply the plaster to the bruised place carefully if not too soft or too hard, so that both parts are well-lubricated and able to move smoothly
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 Reward the member after a short while.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 "And if any injury occurs to the member, as long as there is itching on that member, then you should gently massage that member with warm water until the itchiness subsides.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 "And again apply a poultice, and let the leeches be warmed up and released, and similar things if necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 "And make sure the bloodletting cannot come to that member because it is too thin, and if necessary warm up the veins gently and hold them still until they cease.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 "And none of these things that we have said come to harm or injury, unless you do not apply the leeches gently as mentioned.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 "And when you have placed your hands on his neck and feel the pulse in his carotid artery, make sure that there is no movement or agitation of any kind; and lie still on your back, until such a restoration as mentioned occurs in twenty days or four score and five.
de la brisure de la main	 arm
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 It itches the back of the hand and whenever we move our hands a lot, only one side will itch many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And when the hand pricks a break or tear, it is advisable to place the fingers closely together and hold them steady in front of the eye, so that they do not move until they heal properly.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And if the break occurs on top of or below the belly button, tell the patient to gently squeeze it and instruct them not to remove anything until they are instructed to do so by a doctor.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break occurs in front of you, tell them to place one eye on each palm and hold them steady with their other hand while holding it tightly against your chest, making sure that both hands are outstretched and right.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 "The dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place and prevents it from moving, causing the limb to become misaligned and resulting in great pain and injury.
de la cuixe brisie	 "This phrase likely refers to an issue or problem with the shoulder joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 "The dislocation is often accompanied by pain and misalignment of the shoulder joint.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 "And when the dislocation occurs, it causes great pain and misalignment of the shoulder joint.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 "And if it is dislocated at its base and pricked by the nail of one hand or another, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if the hand is bent towards the nail and the extension is up; then put the mirror against its back so it faces itself, and the eyes should close when
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 If there is an abscess, then you drain it in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 When you're finished tightening the ligature on both sides of the arm and leg with a strip of cloth to prevent slippage during surgery; then proceed to tie off the strip between the leg and arm, tying it tightly so that when cut through, it will be removed in one piece.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if it happens that the dislocation occurs, and there is pain when it occurs as we have said many times, then you should be able to hold steady if it requires more force.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 And there is no breakage of the arm as we have seen in the shoulder joint, whether with the help or by force alone.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 The joints are restored at different speeds depending on their diversity of composition.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 Of the road to hell
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 The road to hell is rough but it passes by many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks only with a small fracture or with force and has any wounds anywhere on the body and is painful everywhere and causes pain as well, that means there's injury.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the restoration is when it gets tight to its two ends, as long as it's kept together you can't let go; then put on an anchor and fasten one end tightly so that you hold onto it until you're done with all the other breaks, like the anchor point and others. If there are any accidents where it is needed, keep tight until it is sane or straight again.
de la brisure de la jambe	 The wrist break
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 When the leg has two bones, one is called the "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; when it comes to an arm, and in cutting into it as in cutting through both arms equally, there are fractures everywhere; if the two bones were broken together, then the limb would be fractured all over.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 "And if they are pulled gently
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 "If one pulls a large bone
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 "And the injury is light
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After the patient has completed their work
de la brisure des os dou piet	 "Of the bones due to injury
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 "The joint does not dislocate
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 "And if there are any broken bones from the fall, place them next to each other so they do not touch the ground; and cover your face with a small cloth until you have wrapped it up completely, then hold tight onto your breath while inhaling deeply, and other things that I will teach you.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 "And when the third or fourth joints are passed, if there is a dislocation on one of them, because you will find the bones broken in some way.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 "And if there are any broken bones from the fall and they have been reset, place them next to each other with a larger cloth covering that I will teach you; and then hold tight onto your breath while inhaling deeply, and cover yourself with a large cloth over your body until it is done.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And you should not harm any other things that I have mentioned above, except for the breaks and wounds that we have discussed; and seek treatment if necessary to prevent accidents.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the bone fracture at the point
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of a woman is fractured, if she wants to straighten it out, first align her back to the lower part and hold it steady with her buttocks; then fill in the gap where the wound was with cotton, as tightly as possible; after that you must let go of the wound, but gently press on each side until the bone returns into its place; if she wets herself during this process, apply a piece of cloth to it, and bandage it securely, filling the whole hole up with the cotton.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 "When the limbs are pricked by an object or woman as we have said in the arm of a blacksmith," and they cannot be concealed from him who holds his study and books.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 "For the dislocations mean more often than not, to follow this route of repair:
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 "When the neck is dislocated, take a rope made of hemp and bind it tightly around where it was torn off; then let it hang there three or four days until it heals completely.
de brisure avec plaie	 "To treat dislocations with wounds:
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 "It is advisable for someone who has a dislocation with an abscess or the like to be treated now if what our previous statement says holds true.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "And if the wound heals but not completely, then you should come back to try and reset the dislocation as soon as possible or at least in an hour.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 "And if the shoulder dislocation is corrected gently and firmly, so that it settles down smoothly, as long as the dislocation remains still, but do not overly tighten or loosen anything, because you are at risk of a bad injury.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 "And if you try to correct it by gently and firmly applying pressure at the joints, but make sure your hands are relaxed.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 "And when using this tool to correct the dislocation, make sure your hands are relaxed; and depending on how much pressure is needed for each joint - whether it's VII or VIII pounds of force required at a specific location, as well as the size of the injury. And if you need three or four times more force in order to perform the procedure effectively, then do so.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palanque," as soon as the joint has been placed into its place and held in one go, until they are both aligned with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And the breaks must be gentle and the limbs should not easily take hold of the bone as long as you grasp the joint firmly, so that the limbs are unable to grip it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 And if you cannot hold the bone as we have said, and with an instrument that is suitable for this purpose, incision or surgery can be performed on it.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone has been reset and the patient experiences great pain afterwards, you know that this is not part of its natural course.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If you hold it in place for long enough and apply a black vine-stew made of bitter herbs with vinegar to the wound, and cover it properly as quickly as possible according to the size of the wound, making sure not to let the fracture disturb it; many times this is done, causing wounds or death, and often leaving the limb more swollen and painful than in other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt whether it's necessary to make a cut, as we have advised, then you apply pressure in place of stitches, except for those that require stitches; but you loosen them loose, and bind them tightly together.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after the first or second day of dressing the wound if you think that what you have done is all right then put on a soothing ointment to stop bleeding, as well as similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 It's necessary that you dress the second limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is clean and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And make sure both limbs are dressed in the same manner as before to ensure proper healing.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And each day the dressing is maintained and it cannot be undone but to remove the bandage when there are small pieces of bone which come from cuts so that you want the wound covered, and all these fragments should be removed that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And a fistula comes to its place, or another way of corruption arises if it is necessary for you to cure as described in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and opened up in a member of the body, whether it be from the wrist or elbow, and other large bones if one doesn't treat it right away, for many times comes death but he leaves as long as he can; by chance, after X days or Y weeks, then cure the wound, so that you do not leave.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 of those who come from sorrow
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 We often come after the health of the bruise, especially when it is near the joint, and the pain is so great that one cannot do the usual things with their arm or leg; by chance they are unable to move them naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 When the wound is fresh, if one treats it with ointments such as wax, incense and sulphur, or other ointments that contain aloe vera or wine; wraps them around tightly and keeps tight, so they do not loosen in the hands at any time; also holds on to another one until the first one heals. Or tie a bandage without anything wrapped around, so long as it is fresh, and treat it so long as it is clean.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 two limbs which are weak after dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 When the bone fracture is restored and after weak limbs are straightened gently if there were any of these causes: because one was too tightly bound making it impossible to straighten as well as he could have done; or because there was too much tightness preventing them from coming back into place; or due to many repetitions, or due to excessive movements that came at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the arm if they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And the cure is that you must stretch it gently and make it flexible as long as possible; continue with massage treatment, joy and sorrow treatment; then apply ice to reduce swelling if necessary; all while ensuring that any movement returns to its normal place on the limb; return to its natural state
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 "The arm was injured after surgery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 "After the restoration of limbs, if they are torn open and their shape is irregular, believe those who say you must tear off the limb all together; many people have done this in our land; it is painfull and leads to great harm, and often death. However, there are gentle ways, such as cooking bitter leaves or fat from goose liver with a mixture of herbs, or tearing fat pieces and grinding them into a fine paste that you apply. If you use fatty strips and grind them finely until they resemble flour, and then apply.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 "Do not hold the dislocation repeatedly for an extended period with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Let the limb rest when ever any hour
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And the dislocation must be treated with gentle care and treatment, so that they can heal properly.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 This chapter discusses the causes of dislocation.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place and prevents it from moving properly, causing misalignment in the limb and resulting in great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 If there is no alternative treatment available, now is the time to resort to another approach.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 When the pain is severe and it cannot be relieved in any other way, then a fire cautery must be applied to the patient; hold their eyes steady so they do not move until healing occurs.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 "And I ordered the doctors to treat dislocations with great care.
des mandibules	 the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 If the jaw is dislocated and its ligaments are loose and flexible, it can sometimes be treated with gentle pressure; if they are completely dislocated, then it may slip down to the chin or into the throat, preventing saliva from being held in the mouth, making speech difficult or even causing paralysis of the tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 If a dislocation is small and can be corrected with repeated attempts.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is completely dislocated and requires a more serious approach, you should gently pull the jaw into place with both hands, one at the base of the dislocation in the mouth and another above to move them apart; then command the patient to soften their jaws and open them as wide as possible while keeping their lips together.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And they move their arms at will, as they please from their own will
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the head of a joint becomes dislocated due to heat or oil, it will not stay in place unless treated right away.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are repeatedly dislocated and the joints become misaligned between two knuckles, unless treated right away with oil, wax, and grease, then hold it gently in place, ensuring that the mouth is not too tight or loose; and do not force any further movement of the jaw, but gently ease the pain while holding tightly, until both jaws are aligned.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two jaws cannot be moved back into place within an hour and are still clenched due to fever or worry, then take them out gently with care, and try to vomit while keeping cool; in such cases, vomiting is the best solution for the stomach.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 "And when you see this, remember that it is a loss; and many times he who has seen it dies in seven days.
de la forcelle	 the wheel
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The tire could not be dislodged because of its thickness and softness, and it was destroyed the first time it was burned; and thus, it is said.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 The restoration is that if the wounds are on his back and stretch out his arms; then push down on his chest with your palm, it will return to you; afterwards put a cloth over him and bind tight; and whoever dislodges the arrow from the breast may not do so until he grows.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 "The shoulder should not be dislocated in any way: either from beneath the arm or above it; secondly from behind the spine and thirdly from the front.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 "And in any case there is no use hitting it with blows or kicks, and if you hit the shoulder with a sharp blow, take care that it was dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	 "It is important to straighten it as much as you can; and when the healing has begun.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 "And the difference between dislocated and not-dislocated shoulders is obvious: you will find that there is a hole in the shoulder which is dislocated, but no such hole where it's not dislocated; and when it's dislocated at the top (hidden dislocation), or even if it's partially dislocated, because of this you clearly see to what degree.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	 And the way it should be is to gently hold the arm down with one hand and put your other hand over the shoulder, then gently loosen the joint from its place at the top of the left side, ministers gently moves the hand up and stretches out in the same position; if that comes to pass.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said afterwards, you should gently bathe the arm in hot water and soothe it with gentle, soothing movements such as those of fenugreek and mallow, and so forth; then lay it down on its side, gently loosening and stretching out from above, or else put your other hand underneath to support its shoulder gently, and move the elbow up and away. And another way is to simply hold its upper arm with one hand while massaging downwards from beneath towards the front, avoiding too much softness or roughness, then place a towel under it as well; also you may massage behind the arm for relief.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if it is too tight, if pressed with no weight, then a dislocation occurs now
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And similarly in another way: if one has a sprain of the arm, which occurs when the joint is moved out of place too forcefully or with excessive force, and does not relax as it should; then the dislocation will return to its original position.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 Then place the arm behind the back with the hand on top and stretch the arms out in front of you; then place the hand over the back bone to support the arm as shown by an illustration, and let your hands hang down at the sides. The dislocation will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is settled in any way that may be, if it is convenient to you to put the salve on as soon as possible with powder from the mill, with incense and cinnamon bark, covering all of the shoulder and torso, then strain through it and tie a bandage around the arm at its base, so they do not move.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And it is convenient to do this soon as possible while the members are comfortable, because he will heal more quickly; and then move it after seven or eight days, if necessary; and if it's fixed firmly but not loose, you should loosen it.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the connection is due to moisture or from some other cause, it's convenient that you apply the third cut on top of it, whether it was applied before by another incision.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 "And if you do all that and it comes loose after 7 days, the joint does not hold together, nor can one raise their arm above that level due to the nerve at the base of the shoulder being compressed or stretched; as a result, the joint never straightens in its original position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The dislocation that occurs downwards, and the legs or back, if it is caused by force, and forcefully extending the hands, and a lesser injury may occur.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 "After healing comes stiffness in the member and movements after some time, as long as you keep it moist, and until it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 "The dislocation is painful.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 "The joint that is painful becomes sore at points, and the soreness comes back; it is also sore throughout all parts, including front and rear, and the dislocations are not easily cured because one can see and feel them well.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 "And when you tie a bandage tightly to an abscess, if it is not visible clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 The binding is tight and cannot be loosened, nor should the arm move in any way
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 It is important that you reset the dislocation in this way so as to prevent it from happening again, because if it had been fixed properly, then it would not have happened at all; and moreover, when there are other dislocations and great pain, and by chance they come too, and they bring death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 The restoration is done when it has been made as tight as possible to tighten the arm with your two hands; and spread them wide, and hold them in place according to how they are connected, so that the joint remains stable until it straightens on its own.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 "And if he has dislocation on his shoulder, when he doubles one hand over the other, it causes pain at the base of his palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 "If it does not return to its place, the doctor should perform a strong extension; and if he extends both arms, gently apply pressure with a feather on each elbow, until the arm is returned to its place.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	 "And if the joint is firm in its place, remove the bandage and let it be; but if you see that the joint does not seem to work well, repeat the plaster and leave as before.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 "After the healing of the joint, it will no longer move if it is wet and pressed hard enough to cause discomfort; you must insert a small amount of wool into its opening, then leave it there for one night, then open it up again, and repeat this process until it calms down. If it swells or becomes inflamed with pus, strain it gently.
li dislocation de la main	 "Dislocation of the arm
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 "The arm joint is dislocated and the movement is light; it's best to have a doctor reset it gently as soon as possible in order for it not to swell or cause further damage.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 "If the arm is dislocated and you wrap it around something soft like a towel, stretch out its fingers and look for any signs of dislocation or swelling in order to determine whether it's properly reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 "The dislocation occurs at the wrist of the hand if he moves his arms in a table manner and looks at his hands through the joints.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 "If it happens again, that is good; if not, keep trying until the eyes stay open.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 "If the pain stops and you cannot move it after some time, then force open its eye with fire.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 "When the hands are loose and you put it into place as we have taught you to do, then apply fire and let it burn for a time; after that, remove it gently.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If he cannot move and there is no pain or swelling, if you apply hot oil to it and pull it gently as long as it remains still.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 "the dislocation of both arms
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 "Do not dislocate both arms at once, do not dislocate the back of the hand or abdomen; when you have done this, hold one arm steady and let the other move towards a particular spot; leave it loose for a moment so that it may move freely, then bind it again as we advised before. When either is dislocated in another place, tie them both together until they are loose again.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 "two dislocations of the elbow
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 "When both elbows or shoulders are dislocated, and there is no treatment available, as the patient may die.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 "When the eyes are injured, and they cannot hold still, many times both arms or legs tremble uncontrollably; if this occurs on the back it is called 'gilbosi'.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And those who come from blows or shocks or similar things, they used the old methods of treatment with great words, or he has no benefit in all great ways; but I have arranged them according to my intent and made arrangements in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that for the boils that come before and directly on the thighs, there is no remedy found except by cutting into it from behind; and for those that come straight on the back of the arm, if not cured properly then they will come out through the elbow, as we have said; and all wounds should be held steady so they do not move until they are healed.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 "If the treatment does not work with three long ropes, tie one end of each rope to the patient's arm and pull it tight, then place them around the table elbow near each other, put the other end of one rope in front of the other elbow, and press firmly until they are straight; if you see any misalignment, if that happens at the turner, who will make a movement with his hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 "If one of the elbows becomes sore or inflamed and you want to turn it, between those two tendons there is a finger from long; and in between those two fingers, hold down both fingers tightly as they do not move; and between those two fingers, if one moves, pull on that finger until both are straight.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 "And when it is dislocated, if you apply the plaster with sufficient moisture and then wrap the injured area gently until it heals. And in case of dislocation, administer soothing medicines as well as urgent ones to treat injuries; after applying the aforementioned treatment, no more dislocations occur.
des dislocations de la hainche	 "Joint dislocations are a serious injury that prevents the joint from moving properly
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 "Joint dislocations in the arm and shoulder are only temporary, but not others; and the dislocation of the elbow is affected by two factors: forward and backward movement.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when one pulls a bad limb with the good one, it becomes longer and more flexible than the healthy ones, and cannot double their growth by fire; and those who are treated in this way end up with swollen ankles from holding them back too much.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 The sign of the one who comes to burn is that it can be contrary to these precautions.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 The sign of the one who comes to face is that it does well with its leg as long as precautions are taken; otherwise it doubles in size and causes pain if not held back before, and holds tight urine, and inflates ankles, and when it grows, it moves up the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 The sign of the one who comes behind is that it cannot spread and double in size, and the leg is shorter than the other one, ankles are relaxed, and a bone is extracted from beneath them to the side.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 "The members of this joint dislocation occur when you repeatedly move it out of place and each time the pain increases, without any treatment available; and no matter how many times you attempt to reset it, it is not recommended.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 "If the joint is fresh and it's just from this dislocation, then you try to reattach it back in place, and the damage will be limited and superficial; but still there may come another injury if not careful enough.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 "If it doesn't return in this way, then you need to immobilize the limb and try an external remedy like putting ice on it; also if there are other wounds nearby, apply a poultice of herbs on them as well.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common; if a dislocation occurs as we have mentioned, it's alright
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, if it is convenient to apply treatment to the dislocated limb by placing ice on its affected side, then place the arm over the affected angle, and from there up towards the forceps; afterwards perform other procedures with your arms, and bind tightly the large piece of the affected limb, and stretch it upwards in order for it to return to its place now; this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 If you cannot do so by the manner we have mentioned, if it is convenient that you tie both of your arms to a strong rope and hang them above your head; or bind one arm tightly with the affected limb while holding the other leg straight up towards the ground with the free hand; afterwards command another minister who binds the patient's wrist, and attach several ministers hanging down together with the affected limb, binding it into place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 "When dislocations occur at the end of an extremity, if they prick the artery or vein, as we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and are extracted from the limb properly, then reset them between the joints at the affected joint; and apply ice to the affected area, so that it does not bleed. And when resetting the dislocation occurs, first immobilize both hands and feet, and hold the dislocated extremity tightly with your other hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 "It's alright then.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, lie down and press into it as we mentioned in the previous chapter, and prick at the healthy part of the extremity.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And when the dislocations are in front of you, extend your unaffected leg as mentioned earlier, and press with your other hand into the affected joint; then stretch towards it from the opposite side.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And when dislocations occur and cannot be stretched out fully without causing pain or injury to the limb, it should stay still at rest for three or four moments, then loosen up again gently while holding firmly with the elbow on a table; and if you see that they are aligned, let them stay like this as long as possible, keeping the limbs comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 Of the shoulder joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	 The joints are released in three ways: stretching and releasing, pushing and pulling, and not pressing too strongly on any one side.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if you stretch the joint and it does not straighten out to its proper place, then continue holding on until three or four moments have passed, loosen up again gently while firmly holding with your elbow on a table; and after that time is over, release the joint.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And when one member is out of place as long as treatment continues very severely as we have experienced in the healing process so that it may be healed
de la dislocation dou talon	 Of the arm.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The hands are never swollen and do not swell completely, or burst
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And if the veins are swollen and burst, then you must stretch gently to its part that is injured: the arms should be extended gently as it has been affected only slightly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely swollen and burst, if necessary, you should make the affected arm lie flat on the ground between your feet to hold it still while treating the injury; extend each limb gently one at a time using both hands or arms as needed to treat the wound, making sure not to move the affected limb as much as possible; repeat this process until the dislocation returns.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 "If the dislocation occurs at one point, secure it with splints and stretch out the affected limb, loosen any stitches that are too tight on the affected limb behind the knee; allow to rest for two or three days and have the patient move the limb slowly if they feel better after each movement. If the pain worsens as a result of moving the limb, you should remove the splint from the second joint down or fourth joint, stretch out the affected limb again in four days.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If the arm is dislocated, you should lift it as gently as possible and secure it with splints; allow to rest for two or three days.
des dois	 You are asking about the translation
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 "When both arms are dislocated and it is appropriate to stretch gently while working, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When both arms are dislocated and it is appropriate to stretch gently while working, make sure the dislocation occurs in one joint or another, put your hand on that joint opening, press down with your hand firmly until they straighten up; when they have straightened out, let them rest for three days.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 "Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 "When a wound and dislocation occur together, many times it results in death: if you are not careful with the treatment, do not move the limb unless necessary; leave the patient's hand on the wound to avoid further injury, as we have experienced.
Amen	 Amen
