This book is completed for you, O my sons, it is a part of the knowledge of medicine, fully detailed and reaching its goal in clarity and explanation. I thought it fitting to complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the manual of surgery.
The practice of surgery in our land and time is poor due to the lack of doctors, causing the art to be neglected and its effects reduced. The only remnants of surgery in ancient texts are simple diagrams, engraved by hands and filled with error and confusion, until their meanings were lost and their benefits disappeared.
I intend to revive and enrich this field with this treatise through explanation, clarification, conciseness, and providing illustrations of the human body and other tools used in surgery, as it is a means of adding detail and facilitating what is necessary.
The reason that there is no skilled craftsman in our time is because the practice of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its practitioner to study the art of dissection as described by Galenus before engaging in it. One should understand the functions of the limbs and their joints, connections and disconnections, knowledge of bones and nerves, their number, exits, arteries, veins, and pulse points, as well as the locations of their exits and origins.
Physicians are plentiful in name but few in action, and certainly not skilled in the art of surgery. We have mentioned some of them at the beginning of this book.
Those who are not well-versed in what we have mentioned regarding surgery will inevitably make mistakes that lead to the death of people, as you have often seen many who claim knowledge and expertise in this field without actual understanding or experience.
This is why I have seen an ignorant doctor cut on the neck of a woman with a pigs' tooth, breaking some veins in her neck; blood gushed out until she died between his hands.
You will also see another doctor attempting to remove a stone from a man who had been bitten by it in the eye, and the stone was large; it was crushed before being removed with a piece of glass. The man died after about three days, and I had advised him to have it removed; however, you can see from the bone of the stone and the surrounding condition that this could not have been done.
You will also see another doctor who lived off the leaders of our country on medicine.
A blacksmith once had a fracture near his heel with an injury; the ignorant doctor hastily treated it by setting the fracture on the injury with great force and certainty, and left no chance for the injury to heal.
Then release it on its desires, then leave it for some days and command it not to suture until it twitches his leg and foot and excel in healing.
Bring it (the patient) and hasten the suturing, so that comfort is achieved and he is released from his ailment, except that corruption has already ruled the limb and I could not cure it.
Corruption continues to strive in the limb until it perishes.
You see a later doctor, pale and weak with cancer, then he dies after days until his bones crumble, and this is because if cancer has become malignant from mixing of black substances, it is not appropriate to expose it to iron pincers.
Except that it is in a limb capable of being excised completely.
Therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you to know that work with hands divides into two: a work accompanied by safety and a work with pain in most cases.
And beware of every work that comes from this book which has fear and danger, so it is necessary for you to avoid it and refuse it.
Lest the ignorant find his way to speech and slander, take for yourselves belts and garments and treat your patients with kindness and firmness.
Apply the best method leading to safety and praiseworthy outcome, examine the dangerous and intricate ailments thoroughly.
Protect yourselves from what you fear may mislead you in your religion and worldly life, for it will remain a barrier to your path and elevate you in the world and the hereafter according to your abilities.
According to Galen in some of his advice, do not treat an illness poorly lest you be known as a poor physician.
This article is divided into three sections.
The first part.
In the first part, about burning with fire and cutting with sharp instruments arranged from head to toe and tools images and all that is required by hand in work.
The second part.
In incisions, lacerations, fractures, suturing, amputation, and extraction of foreign bodies, etc., all these in orderly sequence accompanied by illustrations of instruments.
Chapter Three.
In algebra, calculus, treatment of wounds and similar matters arranged from head to foot, accompanied by illustrations of instruments.
Chapter One.
On the Knee.
Before describing the work on it, it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages, and under what condition it should be used.
I say that the discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of the knee, a detailed and precise science, is secret knowledge known by some scholars.
They have differed on it and its explanation has been shortened out of fear of elongation.
I say that the knee is beneficial in general for all bad conditions of joints, whether with or without substance, and these are two types: the hot joint without substance and the dry joint without substance.
As for the dry joint with substance, they have differed on it. Some say that the knee is beneficial in this case, while others disagree and say that the knee does not help in a disease that is both hot and dry because the nature of heat and dryness are similar.
Among the ailments is treating a cold and dry warm disease, or a hot and dry cold one. The one who says contrary to that, states that charcoal in fire may benefit from a cold and dry warm disease occurring in human bodies. Whenever you insert charcoal into the human body and moisten it to a state of heat, you will cool down the human body.
I say with his (Albucasis's) words, because experience has shown me this fact numerous times, except that it should not be relied upon unless one has studied and trained in the field of charcoal making, specifically in the art of making quality charcoal. The diversity of the constitutions of people, their diseases, their causes, their symptoms, and their duration should be considered.
As for other types of constitutions, there is no fear of them for you, and the cold moist diseases have reached a consensus among physicians, and they do not differ regarding the benefit of charcoal in such diseases.
Know, oh sons, that the secret of treating with charcoal by fire and its superiority over charred medicines is that fire has a unique property that only affects the affected part without harming another connected part, except for a mild damage.
If the [medicine] that burns is applied to a member beyond what follows, it may encounter resistance from other parts and possibly cause disease in the member, perhaps even death. Fire, because of its nobility and honor, does not do this unless it persists.
It has become clear to us through experience, the duration of service, attention to craftsmanship, and adherence to facts.
I have refrained from lengthy speech, but if it does not belong in this book, I would have informed you of the secret and effective way to make fire destroy diseases in the body through a philosophical argument that will clarify your understanding.
Know, O sons, that they have differed regarding the time when the [medicine] is effective and considered the best time as spring.
I say that the [medicine] can be effective in any time because the harm that precedes time takes a while to achieve the benefit that is brought by the [medicine]. And certainly, if the [medicine] is of vital necessity that does not allow delay, fear of it following in its wake is greater than the danger from what precedes time.
Do not perform on you, O sons, what the common people and the ignorance of physicians may suspect, namely: something that does not require recurrence, and make it a habit.
This operation is not to be performed, as you believe that this thing is only like a medicine which changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of the diseases.
This thing is superior to the medicine in terms of quick success, effectiveness, and intensity of its action.
The disease may return at some time due to the nature of its cause, enabling it and strengthening it, and what cannot be expected in the body from the gathering of impurities within it and the preoccupation of the soul with acquiring food and similar reasons.
O Allah, may the disease that is used in it (the operation) be a gentle disease and in a little impure part or humors. Similar to the extraction of a tooth from pain and similar things, it may not return in that place and this will be in the least degree.
And as for the common people's saying that this thing is the last of medicine, it is a true statement to the extent that those who say so believe that there is no remedy that can be beneficial with medicine or without it after the operation and prescription contrary to that.
The meaning is that the last of healing (therapy) is when we use the doses of treatment in a disease, and those medicines did not work, then we use another therapy and it worked. Therefore, from here it is clear that the last of healing (therapy) is the last of medicine. The meaning is that, generally and among many ignorant doctors, it has become widely known.
It has been mentioned at the beginning that gold is better than iron, and they say so because of the nobility and shine of gold. However, they are mistaken in thinking that the location of the therapy (kunya) depends on this. This is not correct in general.
I have tried this, and found that it works only in some animals, not others. The therapy (kunya) with gold is better and more effective than iron as they say; but if you protect the pot with gold in fire, it does not indicate when it will be protected up to the degree of redness of gold.
And because it speeds up the cold and if you increase its protection in fire, it melts quickly in the pot. Therefore, the therapist among us prefers iron over gold for efficiency; may Allah help him do the right thing.
This chapter is arranged in order from the head to the foot, so that it may be easy for the student, if Allah wills, what he desires from it.
The First Chapter.
In the head, there is one method (or technique).
This method (or technique) is beneficial against excessive moisture and dryness on the skull, which are causes of headache, frequent discharges from the head to the sides of the eyes and ears, frequent sleepiness and toothaches and other scalp wounds. In general, for every disease that results from dryness, such as scabs, headache, scalp itch, and similar diseases.
This picture commands the patient first to rinse his head with an easy-to-use, gentle shampoo for three or four nights according to the strength and habit of the patient.
Then he commands him to cut his hair with scissors, then he sits him between your hands with his hands on his chest.
Then you put the palm of your hand on his windpipe between his eyes, then when your middle finger reaches its end, teach this position with a movement (or gesture).
Then heat the olive oil bottle shown in this picture.
Expose from the bone the size of a walnut or an almond. Raise your hand if it is not, otherwise prepare your hand with iron again, or with something else if you have grown cold. Expose from the bone as you mentioned, then take some salt and put it in water and drink a small amount of it. Place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then place a soaked cloth (in oil) on it and leave it until the dryness of the burn goes away, then treat it with the four-finger-width ointment until it heals, if God wills.
They said that a wound, whenever it remains open, causes putrefaction and it is better and more beneficial.
Some of them mentioned that the skin should be pulled to the bone and the stitch kept until part of the bone marrow burns, then it is crushed afterwards, what burned from the bone is removed, then it is treated.
Others said that it should be stretched until it affects the bone in a strong way, so that a piece of the bone falls out like a chip or a small flake, and they claimed that this is beneficial for the healing of the skull and leaving the wound open for a long time.
Then he treats it until it breaks, and I do not see these two types of fractures except in some people and on the way to breakage and leave them for better and with safety if it is present; indeed, the head swells when its natural connection separates, as we have seen in other members.
Indeed, when the humerus head is naturally weak and the first type of fracture submits and is better for me, I use it and do it if Allah wills.
The Second Chapter.
Fractures of the head (also).
If a fracture occurs in the neck of the humerus and it is long, then use traction, compression, pulling, bandages and padding; indeed, if the fractured bone has been set, nothing of that will be helpful, observe. If the head of the humerus is strong by nature and not weak, and it found a hard splint, then break another bone slightly above it. Then break a bone on every joint of the head until the skin separates and reveals the muscle layer that we have described. Apply a probe deeply at the site known as 'the fauces' and gently with your hand in this position, do not dislocate the bone, for it will cause her intense pain unlike other skull fractures. I shall refer to this specific fracture in its location.
It is important to perform a probe gently at the base of the skull and deeply rather than at the center of the skull, this is her appearance.
Chapter Three.
On fractures that are not transverse.
If there is a fracture in the skull accompanied by pain and swelling that extends to the eye, the patient should be given medications for the head and all treatments mentioned in the illnesses section, if this does not help then the fracture remains in two places. The fracture can be treated with a sharp medicine or iron.
If the fracture is treated with a burning medicine, take a clove and grind it on both sides until it becomes powder. Then make an opening in the swollen area with a broad needle until it fits under the skin that can accommodate the powder.
He should enter it beneath the skin until it disappears, then press firmly on it with a broad instrument and leave it for ten hours, then dissolve it and extract the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days, then carry it.
He should anoint a boil with oil until the place softens, then treat it with the cautery, provided Allah wills, and if you wish, you can do this with some of the burning medicines mentioned in the thirteenth chapter among the burning medicines.
As for cauterizing with iron, it should be done with this characteristic: The container depicted in its image is to be heated.
The container with screws is called "Makwa al-Musmariyyah" because its top resembles a screw and has some slots in it, and there is a small hole in the middle of it.
Then put it on the location of the wound and hold it with your hand, while you slightly rotate the hot iron a little at a time, and the amount of burn from the skin should be similar to half of it. Lift your hand so as not to burn the nerves that are beneath it, lest there be leakage, then boil the boil in salt water and put it on the location for three days. Then the wound is smeared with oil, then it is treated with honey until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, seal this wound with a piece of skunk skin from the box and preserve it from festering in this wound specifically.
The Fourth Chapter.
Treatment of Fistulated Wounds.
If the wound is treated as we have mentioned in the treatment of various diseases and it does not heal, and you observe symptoms that are not described in our list of symptoms for the first category (disease with drugs or fire), then repeat the first treatment with either the drug or the fire. It is necessary to smear the skunk box until it turns white after you have marked its position on the wound with a line of approximately half a finger width or thereabouts and leave it for a moment before you press down hard enough to cut through the flesh and reach the bone.
It is necessary that you should preserve the connection of the jaw, for if it is burned, the nerve or muscle connected to it will be affected and result in numbness.
Be cautious and vigilant to avoid the spillage of blood from the severed flesh, for there is danger in it. Whoever is ignorant of what he does, and was not an experienced craftsman before, should leave the work to someone else.
This is the method of treating lateral nasal discharge from sinuses in its place, as written in the book, if Allah wills. If you find something incorrect with this technique, do not use it.
If you find the body of the patient suspected, make an incision in the middle of the head as we have described and treat the wound until it heals, if Allah wills.
If you want to use the method we mentioned in the chapter on treating sinuses with a probe equipped with two needles, it is better than this one and more effective.
Fifth section.
Treatment of ear injuries.
If there is an injury in the ear due to cold and it is easy to swell up, and all the treatments we have mentioned in the classification do not work, then insert the probe that is called "al-Nuqta" whose image is shown below.
Then, touch it with the probe around the entire ear as it rotates or around both of them together if the injury is in either one. Move the probe a little away from the center of the ear after determining its location by measurement. The probe should be about ten points in each ear or near that, then treat the locations until they heal, if Allah wills.
Sixth Chapter.
On Bloodletting.
The bloodletting, which is performed on the type of ailments that occur from phlegm, as described in the classification of diseases.
Avoid bloodletting on the type that occurs from congestion and paralysis of nerves.
When this type of bloodletting is done by venesection, cupping and leeching, and it does not yield a cure, then the cause should be sought out with three possibilities. One possibility is at the root of the ear, the second one slightly below the eustachian tube and the third one in the convergence of the eyes.
Make the incision on the side of the affected part, as the swelling only occurs in the visible area.
The bloodletting should be done with a long incision, opposite the upper ear, slightly below the hairline, and another one in the eustachian tube, of a length equal to the diameter of a pulse vein.
Lower your hand with the bloodletting instrument until it sears half a finger's thickness, and this is the shape of the cupping glass and it is a type of cupping known as wet cupping, which differs only slightly from the dry one as you can see. The scalpel should be of moderate sharpness, then treat the location as described until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Seven.
Bandaging the Lacerated Wound.
If bandaging and treatment as described does not heal, and it is not due to a hamstring injury, then lance the wound four times. On each quarter of the head, make a lance-wound as described and another in the middle of the head, and one on the convex part of the head according to what was mentioned.
The dressing method, as described, can also include a lance-wound on the nose of the ulcer, to make it deeper, then treat accordingly.
Chapter Eight.
Treatment for Nasal Fractures.
The cause of the fracture should first be irrigated with large syringes and healing ointments for the nose.
Then, the entire head should be shaved and a dressing made of kohl, as described in the article on bruises, applied to the affected area for several days, since it is a lancing tool.
Perform the same procedure on the location indicated earlier, if it heals with that, then lance three times in the convex part of the head from top to bottom of the neck.
Place a ligature between each incision finger, then treat the wound as presented. If you desire to increase (the number of fingers), and it is likely for that reason, tie the middle finger.
If you desire to increase (the number of fingers), tie the ends and treat it until it heals, and the knots are orange-like on the presented image.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the case of a hernia and the entire body swells up.
It is necessary to begin with cleansing the head using ear syringes and what we have mentioned earlier, then cut off the head of the affected area, make an incision in the middle of the head and one on each side of the head and another at the base (of the neck).
If the hernia causes the entire body to swell up and it is suspected that it might be more than that, and the patient is likely to have a strong and definite disease, tie four knots on the neck veins. The ligature should reach beyond the skin, lift your hand and treat it as mentioned before until it heals, God willing, and the knots are orange-like.
The Tenth Chapter.
In case of compound fracture.
If it is a compound fracture due to trauma, it should first be cleaned with large syringes and all the treatment mentioned in the section on wounds if the cause is severe and there is a possibility of administering medication.
If the patient is a child who cannot take medication, do not use forceps and instruments for cleaning the skull before that for several days with improvement of diet.
Then shave his head, then make a single incision in the center of the skull according to what is found in the characteristics and another incision at a later time. On each part of his skull, make an incision if the patient is strong and there is a possibility of it; then make the incisions mentioned in the "Falaj" owner and bind the body with belts at neck and waist areas, and let the wound be treated with oil according to its characteristics.
If the cause is a child, make the bandage gentle on this shape.
The tenth chapter.
In case of prolapsed anus.
If the cause of prolapsed anus is excessive and hard fecal matter, make the incisions mentioned in the "Falaj" owner.
If the cause of malnutrition is a distance from healthy food and the body of the patient is moist, wash it with that which cleans his brain, according to what comes forward in the process of dissection.
Then cut off the head of the patient, then make a firm cookie from walnut like in shape, then place it on the center of his head and the patient is sitting up, holding it from all sides. Then take one roasted lamb fat.
Then heat it on fire moderately until it becomes hot enough that a finger can be inserted into it, then empty it in the center of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools down. Perform this procedure every week along with all his good treatments until he recovers, if God wills.
If you wish to make small incisions on him, many of them but do not hold the scalpel in your hand, let it be an evaporation, for this type of incision will moisten the brain moderately.
Then place a damp cloth on him soaked in oil or chicken fat.
The second chapter.
In the case of water leakage in the eye.
If it is evident to you that the water leakage in the eye appears with the signs mentioned in dissection, then wash the patient's head and face from all moisture, clean his wound in the steam of the bath for several days.
Then make an incision at the top of his head and open a cavity in the center of the skull, then make two incisions on the temples if the flow of water begins in both eyes or from one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the saw all arteries and veins that are under the skin so that the cavities are in length as wide as the temples and preserve from bleeding.
If you see anything from it, cut it in its place with any treatment possible and the wisdom will come to you regarding the arteries and veins cutting and preserving from bleeding.
And there are two cavities under the cheekbones.
The third chapter.
In the case of collected tears.
If the tears of the eyes are collected continuously and have been before the arteries and veins that are on the surface of the head are cut off, and you suspect that this is due to a thick cold pus, then open the cavity which you described in the beginning of the flowing water. A cavity in the center of the skull, two cavities on the temples and two cavities under the cheekbones, and if more is needed, open a cavity on each side of the eyebrow with a small saw.
Chapter Fourteen.
In what way is the nostril to be cauterized.
If treatment as mentioned in the division does not improve, then apply cautery three nights later. Then cut off its head and remove the middle key with a cork made of olive oil. Then remove with a screw cork two keys above the eyebrows under the hair slightly, and keep the skin surrounding them intact, without cutting it. This is the image of the screw cork.
Chapter Fifteen.
In what way is the eyelid to be repaired.
If the eyelid is injured due to a disease or wetness, then remove one key from the eyelid with this crescent-shaped spoon.
If desired, remove two keys slightly above the eyebrows on both sides and keep a distance from the eyebrow and each key should be as long as the eyebrow.
Do not press the key too hard, only as much as a third of the skin can be burned and the shape of the spoon should be as shown here.
Chapter Sixteen.
In case of injury to the eyeball.
If the canthi are turned inwards, the eyeball will protrude. In this case, there are two methods to treat it. Either the method of burning (the protruding tissue) with fire, or the method of using a burning medicine, as for the former, the patient should be instructed to leave his canthi untouched until they grow back and align.
If the protrusion occurs when the canthi are growing, press on the eyeball with a blunt instrument so that it does not move until they grow back and align. When they have grown and aligned, place the patient's head on a stone and teach him to apply pressure on the eyeball using a piece of paper as a guide.
The guide should initially be placed close to the canthi, then a wet cotton swab is placed under the eyeball (either soaked in white of egg or blue dye). The swab-covered mold is then sealed with clay.
Then, the guide is slowly hardened in multiple stages until it completely burns the skin layer that resembles the paper ashes, clearly showing the result of your work as the eyeball is covered and the hair rises above the eyelid.
Lift your hand when the time comes, then leave it for three days, then wrap it in lard until the dry scabs disappear. Then treat it with mercury until it heals, if Allah wills. If hair reappears after a while and the wound is closed, apply cold cupping.
Prepare the area as before, if there is hair in the lower eyelid, pluck it until it returns to its natural position and no new hair grows from the eyelash. As for cauterizing with burning medicine, instruct the patient to leave the wounds open until they grow and level out.
Then make a figure out of the leather and cut it into an eye shape. Take from the holy soap and unboiled lye, one or approximately a dirham each, grind them together firmly using a mortar and pesticle, so as not to let it harden. Then spread it on the eyelid that you made into an eye shape and place it on one or two eyes, then put a soaked cotton under the eye and have the patient hold his head with your stone.
Put your finger on the medicine and press it slightly, while you move it when the patient feels the heat of the medicine as it is like fire. If the heat persists, leave the medicine and move it with your finger. When the heat subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
If you see the eyelid raised as it is during cauterization or cutting, otherwise treat with medicine at the place where the medicine has no effect and has not darkened until your work is completed and the eye burns. Then put cotton soaked in oil on it until the burning sensation subsides.
Then treat it with castor oil or something similar until it heals, and it is important during the treatment to ensure that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. If the eyelid swells after days or if there is anything in the eye hair, remove it.
Make medicine specifically for that spot where the eyelid swelled, as you did first, then treat it until it heals. This is a picture of a horse's leaf.
Know that human eyes differ in size and depth, so adjust your cauterization technique accordingly. The correct method for healing is not hidden for those who have the skill in this craft.
Chapter Seven.
On a Nasr with an ulcer in the eye socket.
If treating the Nasr as described in the Treatises on Diseases does not heal, it is necessary to cauterize with this characteristic.
The al-Zahrawi commands that you place his head in your stone and hold his head between your hands, the servant, so that he does not move or shake his head.
Then put a swollen bandage in the white egg or in the eyepatch for his eyes, then cover the bowl that has this image on it.
Let it be in the form of a funnel like the nose of an eagle from one side that has the cavity, and if you wish it to be open on the other side, or if you wish it to be closed like a muzzle, except that this form is best for your work, if God wills.
Then you should squeeze the nose (of the animal) if it is open and draw out the gallbladder and blow it, or if it is not open then you open it and draw out the bile, then place the bowl over it, which is a very tight fitting bowl, and hold onto it with your hand until you reach the bone.
Keep your hand slightly away from the cavity towards the eye and towards the nostril, so as not to make a mistake or disturb the patient, for the bowl may fall into the eye and destroy it; if you have reached the bone in the first hole then do not repeat, otherwise prepare another bowl if necessary.
Leave it for three days, then apply a poultice of oil on it and treat it with dry mash (murr) until it opens up. If after forty days it has not opened up, apply the sharp purgative drug that dissolves bone to make it reveal the bone as will be explained in its respective chapter, if God wills.
The last face of the Nasir is mentioned among some of the noses, he goes to the place of the nose, then he chisels it, and places it inside the chisel in this form (image).
Pour a measure of lead, weighing a dirham, into it (the cavity) and hold the chisel firmly with your hand, well greased and without moving the small bone (the little finger) to avoid the lead getting into its eye. It is advisable to apply a poultice made of white egg or water on the eye of the small bone.
If the lead burns the nose and opens it in a strange way, then the nose will open according to what we have mentioned of the procedure and treatment, otherwise, there is no choice but to make an incision in the throat and guide the nose into the nasal passage in its appropriate place.
Chapter Ten.
In what kind of incisions for the eye.
In many cases of incisions in the eye, it is called 'shi'ra', and it happens especially in children's eyes. If this kind of incision is treated as we have mentioned in the section on treatment, the treatment does not work. Therefore, open a small, sharp-edged cup at this location.
Place the base of the cup on the edge of the knife and then place it in the incision until the cup reaches the depth of the incision. Then treat it with kiryot (a medical solution) until it heals, if God wills.
The Tenth Chapter.
In the case of nasal fracture in the mouth.
If a nasal fracture occurs in the althea, the gum or the roots of the teeth and swells then breaks and starts bleeding, and if it flows with pus, it becomes a nasal fracture. If this is treated and does not heal, it is necessary to apply a small cup over the nasal fracture.
Then insert a cup in the nasal fracture and hold it with your hand until the iron band covering it reaches its front and back and do this repeatedly. Then treat it as we have mentioned earlier, until it heals, if God wills.
If a member is severed and the flesh is torn away, otherwise it is necessary to examine its location and remove the rotten bone according to what will come out from it, if Allah wills.
Chapter Ten.
On fractures and dislocations that are difficult to reduce.
If the dislocation occurs due to moisture and the bones move and it is treated with medications without success, then place the head of the plaster in the socket, then pour the mortar that will come to resemble its shape after placing the tube on the tooth socket.
Place the plaster with a wooden handle in it and hold it slightly until the patient feels the heat of fire reaching the socket, then lift your hand, then return the plaster several times as you wish, then the mortar will fill up with brine water.
Hold it for an hour and apply it, then the moving bone will be fixed and the dislocated bone will harden and the rotten moisture will dry up.
Chapter One and Ten.
On toothache.
If the toothache is due to cold or there is pus in it and treatment with medications does not work, then apply heat on both sides of it, either by using heated oil or by applying fire.
If it is about the cupping with lard, it is that you take the beef lard, soften it in an iron pot or a copper pan, then take cotton and grind it on the edge of a vessel, then dip it in the softened lard and place it on the painful area with a roller and hold it until it cools.
Then repeat it several times until the heat of fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, dip cotton or wool in cold lard and place it on the painful area and put the heated iron over it until the heat of fire reaches the cavity of the tooth.
And if it is about cupping with fire, it is that you go to a copper or iron pipe and there should be some asbestos inside it so that the heat of fire does not reach the mouth of the person affected, then heat the vessel which has that shape and place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the vessel cools, do this several times.
Therefore, the pain may go away either on that same day or after another day, and it is advisable in case of cupping to fill the mouth of the affected person with good lard and keep it for an hour before bleeding, and this is the shape of the vessel.
"Describe in any direction and according to the ability, and this is the image of the intestine.
"The second chapter and the forty.
"Regarding camel bones.
"If the camel bones are from a fresh, cold and not spoiled animal and you want to set it quickly, then you heat the hollow vessel which is shown in the figure with both openings.
"To make the gas escape from the other side and place it covered on the same worm twice if necessary until you reach the depth of the worm, if the worm is small, then heat the vessel according to the size of the worm.
"Then leave it for three days, apply a cotton soaked in oil on it until what was burned disappears, then treat it with warm poultices and ointments until it heals, God willing.
"The third chapter and the tenth.
"Regarding camel humps with disorders of sound and shortness of breath.
"If coldness and humidity has affected the head of the camel hump, and there is no doubt that this is accompanied by a feverish state, it is necessary to empty the affected area first with easy medicines, then apply heat from the meat of the slaughtered animal at the base of the hump in the lower position.
Warning: Do not let the needle reach the bone, and do not burn the skin except half of it, then take another needle at the end of the incision in a long stitch, with the thread being a bandage on the side that advances.
Then treat it as described until he recovers, God willing.
The Fourth Chapter: Forty.
In the case of headache and toothache.
If the toothache and headache are due to cold moistness, without fever or inflammation, and if the disease is persistent: take two needles and insert one above each tooth in shallow and smooth hollows, and place another needle in the center of the chest between the breasts.
The thread should be a bandage, as shown in the figure that has been provided, and if desired, it can be a needle for puncturing with the needle known as the point, whose image has been shown in ear-puncturing. The points should be thirty or so.
Then treat it as described until he recovers, and a thread with three strands can be made on this figure to speed up the healing of the needle by using it in one three-needle treatment. This is the image of the bandage.
Chapter Fifty and Tenth.
On the topic of cataracts.
If the head of a bone (likely referring to the skull) protrudes due to swollen or unattached fluids, and it is not possible to set it during the initial attempt to reset it, then it should be allowed to occur regularly before attempting to reset it again. This should be done when the body part is subjected to the least movement, as we have observed in such cases. It is necessary that the jaw (fekk) be moved first. Then the artery (al-'aliil) is exposed either on the back or on the correct side, and then the skin that is inside the sheath (al-abts) is raised with your left fingers if the separation (al-mufsul) is intact. If it is split, it opens up within.
Then the bladder with the two colored spots (makwahat al-suffudin) is cauterized.
Then the skin is incised with it (the instrument) until it reaches the other side, and it takes a shape of four kiyas, and it may be cauterized with a bladder containing three sifawids, in which case the shape will be six kiyas, and the sifawids will be on the tip of the instrument.
This is an image of a bladder with three sifawids.
And this number (of kiyas) may be increased by one, making them eight, then salted grains and vinegar are placed on the kis, and the artery is tied off and no movement should be allowed for a while until it heals, whether the separation is above or not.
Put a single stitch or several tight ones above the navel, for the separation will widen and the moisture will drain and the artery will close off.
Chapter Six and Forty.
On Amputation.
If in amputation, coldness and excessive exudations occur to such an extent that they are expelled from their sockets and numerous pus discharges happen, and the patient is treated with various medications but fails to recover, it is necessary to draw the cause on his back, make an incision and cut off the limb, then bind it in three bandages. A bandage should be placed beneath the shoulder blade area, with a width of a finger in a buckle-like strap, and two bandages below the side of the single bandage until the bandages take the shape of a triangle and are separated from each other so that they do not meet, and the depth of the bandages should be approximately one-third the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the bandages should be triangular.
On this image and on this scale, nothing more.
If you wish, bind it with a large bandage in the center of the amputation on this image.
The buckle for this single bandage should be in the shape of a circle on this image.
The amputation is made to relieve the pain of those who are tortured by this limb, and it is taught on the amputation according to the desired measurement, then bound with a point-shaped buckle, and treated with the medication that is provided until the wound heals.
Chapter Seven and Forty.
On Cold Abdomen.
If there is exposure of the abdomen, ulceration from putridity or wetness, or foul smell to such an extent that its natural composition is disrupted with a discharge that is excessive and softening, without improvement as described in the classification, then it will not be beneficial (the treatment). The responsible person should lie on his back and learn by pressing three times in this way and to this extent on the abdomen, below the navel, where the human appendix ends.
After each press, let your fist be firm and the stroke along the body be straight, without bending your hand.
The pressure should be as deep as half the thickness of the skin, not more, and the person responsible should stand with both feet, if he cannot stand then he can sit supported by a staff and raise his arms. This is the image of the fist.
You can perform these pressures with a metal fist if you have an assistant and craftsmanship, and ensure that the pressure does not harm the skin so that it burns all the skin, burns the abdomen, reaches the intestines because the skin there is thin, so be aware.
The eighth and forty-first chapter.
In the abscess and tumor of the liver by incision.
If a swelling appears in the liver and you want to learn whether that tumor is in the liver tissue or its capsule, if it is in the liver tissue then it causes heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the liver capsule, accompanied by severe sharp pain, you suspect that doctors have cured it, then it is necessary to locate the cause on its surface, then learn the location of the tumor by palpation.
Then, heat the pouch in fire, this is the pouch that resembles a mill and this is its image. Then, tie it with a single thread until the skin is completely burned and the tumor reaches the capsule so that all of the matter comes out, then treat it like an abscess until it is healed.
This type of tumor should not be used except by one who has long experience in medicine and has encountered these diseases many times, so when he encounters something similar to this work, he should proceed with it and leave it for someone better.
The ninth and forty-first chapter.
In case of dislocation.
Describing the initial steps of reducing a cold dislocation according to Zahrawan's principles, it is to take a long, slender bone splint from a dry yew rod as thick as a finger. Then it should be dipped in oil and heated in fire. Then, a single splint is made between the point of the shoulder and the neck, two small ones without needles near the side under the skin, and two large ones above the humerus bones between the third and fourth dislocations.
Two more splints are also between the fifth and sixth dislocations slightly behind, another in the middle of the chest, one above the clavicle, and three more from behind, one between the arms, and two below the arm splint that is located between the elbows.
Do not let your hand penetrate the splint, it should be on the surface of the skin with a thin coating. Some have reported that some people used a long iron spoon to protect it and insert it between the dislocations until it reaches the same place as the wound.
The abscess comes out as we have mentioned in the abdomen, and in this case it is filled with pus. Either the patient dies from his time or he remains exposed without any healing.
Chapter Thirty.
In the case of piles.
If you treat the disease of piles with what we have mentioned as treatment in the division, and it did not help, then on three aspects, all are correct: one is to tie them with three or four ligatures along the length of the piles.
In the shape of abdominal ligatures, which have the shape we have described for abdominal ligatures, and between each ligature there is a space sufficient for the length of a finger or more, and the knot of the ligature should be the same as the one we have described for abdominal ligatures and do not press hard with your hand on the ligature and the patient's position should be laid flat on his back.
The third aspect is by the ligature and raising the skin that is subject to the piles, where the ligature of the patient ends and raising the skin that is subject to the left piles and your lifting the skin should be on an extension of the body so that the ligatures are aligned along the length of the body.
Then the leeches enter a strongly protected place until they perform skin incision from the opposite side, then the cup is extracted making the cups four, and if you wish to cup with the three-toed leech's cup.
Treat the affected place after leaving it to be swollen for several days, it will be cured from all other treatments.
The First and Thirtieth Chapter.
On the cupping method.
The cupping only benefits in the method of bloodletting specifically, if you treat the one being bled with any other treatment mentioned earlier, your treatment will not be effective; it is necessary to cup four times around the affected area and once on the vein.
Another cup on the abdomen, one on the kidneys, two behind his back between the ribs, and one on the chest and another on the vein, the depth of the cup should be near to the skin puncture; then leave the cup open for a long time for swelling.
Do not leave the ill one from treatment after cupping, collect the meanings quickly by using it; the image of the cup used for the back will be ring-shaped as shown in its image, and the cup used for the chest will be cone-shaped.
Chapter Two Thirty.
On the Feet and Hands.
If a pain occurs in the joints and it is filled with white water, it should be bled on the back of the foot between the ankle and heel.
Place your hand on the lancet and do not bend it, then lift your hand and do not lower it again because it will cause the white water to flow out and the lancet will remain in this position.
Then bleed the hands twice in each hand, with the tip of the lancet from the side of the thumb on the lancet and the other at the length of the hand, one under the wrist and another below it towards the middle of the hand, and on each arm twice.
Leave the lancet open without any treatment for a long time so that water flows out from it, then treat it with all that has been mentioned before.
Chapter Three Thirty.
On the Rupture.
If the rupture is due to cold and swelling that weakens the mask and the pressure inside the abscess and it is suspected that it may be the cause of the rupture and its power has decreased, then make a large lancet on its cavity. According to what comes in any limb with a circular incision and four holes around the pit, sew gently with a fine thread, and a large knot or two on the skin above the tendon.
If you see pus and swelling likely, tie a knot on the abscess and one on each sideboob (translator's note: "khaisirah" refers to the armpit region in Arabic, and due to its proximity to the breast it could be mistakenly translated as "sideboob". However, for the sake of preserving the original text, I have kept it as it is.) and perhaps add two small knots on the limb close to the large one. This treatment is effective; may Allah grant benefit by it.
The Fourth and Thirtieth Chapter.
In the case of a seated patient.
If a seated patient has multiple or single veins that are hard and cold, or swollen pus-filled boils as we have described in the section on incision, treatment will not be effective. In this case, tie three knots below the navel slightly on the abdomen.
If the patient has a knot under the armpit like a thumb and if his limb is cold, he does not digest food, and his face appears swollen, tie a large knot on the limb where it comes out, and another one on the abdomen. Another one on a patient with an abscess, treat it with a ligation and leave the cavity open for some time, then heal it if Allah wills.
The Fifth Thirtieth Chapter.
On the topic of boils.
After cutting it, if the boil has been cut off, lance the cavity which resembles a mill, then place a drain in the same boil that was cut and hold your hand until the cavity reaches the opening of the anus from where blood will flow out. Do this once or twice.
If there are many boils, treat each one as we have described and heal it with the appropriate ointment until healed. And if the cavity is large on the skin, it will be more beneficial.
The Sixth Thirtieth Chapter.
On the topic of the Nasal Ulcer which occurs in the nasal cavity and its surrounding areas.
If no cause is present for the ulcer and the treatment we have described in its place does not work, it may not heal by itself. If a nasal ulcer occurs and pus and harmful exudates run from it, first you should narrow it with a thin string.
Then, recognise the bladder by the string, then fill the bag that resembles a bladder, and insert it into the same location of the bladder with precision, keeping in mind both the position of the bladder and the place where the string has entered. Then prepare the cauterisation tool until those corrupt tissues are burned, either once or twice or thrice according to your need.
And beware of burning the nerve if there is one present, or a large vein, and if the bladder is leaking pus or urine.
Keep away from these places, and do this only if the bladder is in a healthy condition and you are certain it is not perforated. Then treat the place until it heals, if it is stitched and the materials removed, and it remains like that for some time, then know that it has been completely healed.
If the materials are not removed, then know that it is perforated or in a bladder abscess or something similar as mentioned in its location.
The seventh and thirty-seventh section.
In the kidney cauterisation tool.
If there is pain in the kidney, or fever and thick breath with a decline in health, all causative factors should be eliminated. Then bind it on the affected side of the same kidney using a bandage made of twisted threads as mentioned earlier, and perhaps three bandages in the same belly cavity. This will lead to three tightly bound bandages which will be more effective.
Chapter Eighty-third.
On the incision of the bladder.
If weakness and urging to urinate occurs in the bladder due to cold or moisture that prevents the obstruction of urine, the physician should perform an incision in the lower part of the abdomen on the bladder where the hair of the navel begins, and one incision from the right side of the abdomen and another from the left.
And after the incision, from each side should be tied a ligature and an incision made in the lower abdomen or two if necessary, and the wound should be sutured with a suture that follows the edge of the cut.
Chapter Ninth-thirty.
On the incision of the womb.
If there is matter from cold or moisture in the womb, one should abstain from coitus and suturing her wound is difficult or if it ruptures during childbirth or causes pain, then three incisions should be made around the abdomen as we mentioned in the incision of the bladder. An incision on the abdominal pouch below the navel or two incisions, and the wound should be sutured with a suture.
Chapter Forty.
If a dislocation of the shoulder occurs.
If a dislocation of the shoulder occurs, it is possible that incorrect moisture reaches the joint causing it to dislocate. Its sign is that one side becomes longer than the other if they touch each other and you find a gap where the dislocation has occurred. In this case, it is necessary to return the cause to the joint itself using a circular motion.
After learning about the method of setting a bone in the same way that it rotates to be in the center of the circle, and if the tool used for setting does not have this shape, then use three tools similar to the large olive-shaped setter.
Sharpen the instrument deeply, up to the point of piercing the skin completely, then apply it until the patient screams, if God wills it.
The forty-first section.
If a female's private part is torn apart.
If a fracture occurs in the joint and the cause of it was cold and moisture, and treatment has been applied according to what we have mentioned in the sections, but the treatment did not succeed and the time for that has elapsed, then it is necessary to remove the hard clots with warm oil or warm water and similar things.
Then apply the cautery to the cyst and make a small incision in it with either hot cautery or fire. When using fire, there will be many cysts on various faces; one of them should be cauterized precisely at its base with three points similar to a triangle as shown in this image.
It should be cut deeply, and between each point there should be a space equal to the width of a fingernail. The cyst should be oily and there should be a single cautery at the center of the cyst itself so that there are four points altogether. If desired, it can also be made in the shape of a circle as described earlier when removing the cyst.
The circle should encompass the entire cyst and burn off all the surrounding skin; this is the property of the cautery for a woman if the wound is due to the cyst itself and does not extend to the limbs or genitals.
If it extends to the limbs or genitals, apply two cauteries at the location indicated by the cause of the wound in that area and a cautery above the anus with four fingers towards the hairy side; the cyst should be lancet-shaped, and the depth of the cautery should only reach as deep as burning the skin.
If it appears that the wound extends towards the fingertips of the leg, make an incision where you indicate with three or four or more stitches if necessary. If it indicates the wound is beneath the saddlebone towards the tailbone, make an incision there, but only a single sharp knife incision.
Keep in mind, in all cases, do not let the knife reach nerves or large blood vessels as this can cause severe pain or delay healing.
You have witnessed two individuals, one with a wound on the top of the head and another in the knee where the knife has reached all the way to the ankle and crushed it, damaging the entire leg, then there was swelling and death occurred later. Therefore, if the wound is on both sides like this, be aware of it.
Some scholars among the wise have mentioned that for the incision in the abdomen, make a false boil of iron with this characteristic shape. Make it half a span wide and place it at the root of the navel on a date stone or something less than that. Inside this false boil, put another false boil and a third one.
After each false boil, there should be a distance equal to the thickness of a hair, and the false boils should be open from both sides and their height should be like a coin or two coins. Take a lock for them made of iron that has been tempered well in the false boils, this is its shape.
Then, it is heated in the fire until it turns red and the pus is drained. Then, it is placed on the correct position and left at rest on the healthy side. It is then punctured three times in one place, then left for three days, softened with oil, and the wound is kept open for days.
Many (boils) then are treated with lard until it bursts, as stated in this book; we have used this type of ink for our craft and its appearance is pleasing, and only a few can endure it who are skilled at using it, it being good for those who can endure it and receive treatment.
As for the boil treated with burning medications, it is to make cups resembling needles into which a lead or iron ball falls.
In their cavities, there should be a height of two or more fingers and below that the width of a fingertip. They should both be open from bottom to top and bound together in this shape.
Then, they are placed on the correct position and left at rest on the healthy side with the hand pressed firmly. Next, water is poured between the two circles which is heated slightly and held for an hour. The patient bears it and it burns the boil. For it finds the boil like fire.
application of the probe, then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the cautery water with soft water, leave it for three days and apply oil on it until the burn mark disappears, and wait until pus comes out from it, as this will be beneficial.
Apply the leech until the wound is healed. If the wound extends to the foot or ankle, make a watertight container according to the size of the cautery and fill it with the same water. This is the property of the hot water, which has been proven in the article on remedies.
Take a portion each from common salt and quicklime that has not been burnt, squeeze them together and put them in new containers which you have pierced at the bottom with a small hole so that it can contain the urine, and place underneath the container a porous one.
Upon the scrotum and bladder from hot water, take with your finger, grasp them firmly first, then leave the container until the sharp water settles down at the bottom of the heated container, then collect all that water, and pour it again on a new scrotum and bladder.
It will have great strength in many medical treatments and in other parts of the body, as it performs the function of fire directly, and among the medicines is what is called the scourge, such as tartar and alum with soap mixed.
Galenus claimed a story of a man from the Qadma people as a treatment for scourge and vaginal pain, and emphasized his command greatly, claiming that he does not need any other treatment and that it cleanses once.
One may enter the bathhouse carrying it (the affected area), and come out clean, as he takes from the green mustard if it is not available, he takes the fresh one, grinding it with something fatty and placing it on the scourge in the place of pain or in the anus or in the groin.
It softens and leaves for three hours or until the pain ceases to be severe before immersing it in the hot bath. If pus is released from his body, immerse him in the tub. The wound will heal with God's permission; if it does not heal, repeat the treatment after ten days.
If God wills, it heals. Know that no one should use this medicine except after emptying the body. Dioscorides has mentioned that the anus of a male mule is beneficial for this.
The knife shall be sharp, take wool and soak it in old oil to be applied to the deep spot between the finger joint and the wrist, nearest to the wrist. Then take a dry male mule anus.
Heat it in fire until it becomes a small ball, then place it on the wool and leave it until it cools down, then take another one and continue this process until the pain reaches the middle of the arm and the wound settles with God's permission. This treatment is known as the mule's anus strike.
The second and forty-fourth section.
In case of abdominal pain.
In case of abdominal pain, it may be due to various reasons such as falls or blows or ruptures and similar. It may be caused by the impact of cold and wet material, and this type is specific to itself.
The one caused by the impact of cold material should be treated after evacuating the cause, i.e., by applying heat to the abdomen where the pain is, in three layers corresponding to the width of the abdomen itself, after locating the position with a probe in each layer, with five or more dots according to the possibility and strength of the cause.
The one caused by puncture wound should be treated with needle-punctures, and if you prefer, it may be punctured three or four times with a medium-sized suturing needle on this figure.
The third and fourth chapters.
In case of starting boils.
This disease often occurs in small children, and a sign of its onset in the child is that he experiences shortness of breath during activity and movement, and you will find, in the end, pus-filled boils that may extend over other boils.
If you see that and wish to immobilize it, then tie it with a round ligature as shown in this figure. Take a ligature on all sides of the branch, and if you wish to tie it around the branch with a single or triple knot, make sure the knots are close together, then treat the area until it heals as we have described.
Keep in mind that the ligature is to be used for a nerve that has been severed.
Chapter Four and Forty.
On ligatures for fractures and dislocations.
If the dislocations are due to cold swellings in any part of the body, when such injuries occur in both legs, they are commonly referred to as specific fractures.
If the specific fracture is due to treatment as described in the previous section and the injury does not go away, then tie it after the swelling has gone down with multiple ligatures around the dislocated knee joints, using moderate size needles in this manner.
If you need to ligate on the surface of a leg, use a single knot. If the injury rises to the knees or other joints and this often happens, tie it around each knee with three or four ligatures from all sides using this moderate size needle.
If the wound is larger than this, press it and do not dig your hand into the wound but only to the depth of skin thickness. If the wounds reach the armpit or the back, use what we have mentioned about the cataplasms in its chapter.
If the wounds are only in the hands, press around the fingers as one would turn a pair of tweezers. If the wounds remain on the fingertips or on the palm, press each spot individually and on the joints of the hand. If the wounds continue after several days to the joints or knuckles.
Press both from all sides and do not leave any space for the wound to heal improperly or take medicine as it is better to have good food and relieve gas, for this cataplasms will help if God wills with food.
The fifth and forty-fourth chapter.
On the cataplasms of burns.
If a burn appears in the armpit and some skin and fat is burned and this begins near, it is necessary for the patient to fast on that day and use from the malmis a substance which removes blisters from its depth.
Then he lies down between your hands on his back and orders him to hold himself until the fat or skin blisters appear, then you flatten it with a fingertip, then teach him to rub gently under the burn mark on the bone of pain which resembles half a circle with its edges towards the top of the body.
Then boil this pot of its shape.
Then wait for the egg white to coagulate, then pour or apply the medication/salve into its cavity. The attendant should place his hand on it so that it does not move, and having opened between the little fingers, place it under them and close with a bandage, and another attendant ties it up.
And lastly, hold the pot on the mark with one hand, then lower the pot onto the spot itself and your other hand on the pot, stand still and hold it until it reaches the bone or return it again if it does not reach the bone in the first attempt.
Keep your effort from moving the medication pot so that it does not burn the patient, for this may cause either death or great harm. Know that when you do not reach the bone with the tool, your work has not been successful. It is necessary that the pots for children be gentle according to their abilities, and for adults according to their abilities.
Then treat the wound with oil for three days until the scab of fire disappears, then treat it with other medications until it heals. The patient should remain lying on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
It is recommended that food be a treatment duration for him, which does not irritate his abdomen when it passes, lest the pain reoccur and then, if he wishes to continue after forty days, use strict bindings and hold them for another four days, reducing fatigue and overloading from food, drink and fluids.
If he follows this method, his condition will be alleviated, insha'Allah. I shall now explain the treatment for a fistula in the anus, if Allah wills, and as for a fistula occurring elsewhere in the abdomen and starting intermittently, if you wish it not to worsen, make a simple fistula from it at his discretion. Let a third of the skin be burned and treat it as we have described, insha'Allah. Some early authorities have recommended that the fistula be stopped with a plug-like device resembling this image.
After you have learned about the fistula, draw a line on its upper side and another one below it. Then lower your hand to the center with one finger (or thumb), wrap the first finger (or thumb) loosely around the fistula, if Allah wills.
Sixth and Forty-Fourth Chapter.
On Various Wounds.
If a wound occurs in one of the limbs due to falling or hitting and the pain persists for a long time without healing with medication, it is necessary to cauterize with a puncture-type cautery and adjust it according to the size, smallness, weakness, and strength of each limb.
After the wound or injury is cauterized, if it does not heal, the cautery should be repeated because it is common for these types of wounds to move from one limb to another nearby. Therefore, the cautery must follow it until the cause is eliminated.
Seventh and Forty-Fourth Chapter.
On Fractures.
As for fractures, they can greatly benefit from cautery, whether it is a clean or unclean fracture. The type of fracture that occurs due to the softening of the bone and marrow should be cauterized.
If you wish to probe, observe first if the patient's condition is initial and if treated as described in the section of incision, and it neither closes nor stops, suspect that corruption may affect all its humors. Keep him on his head for five days. In the middle of the head, the first one is below it towards the nape at the end of the hair, the second is two on the horns and one from behind on the occipital bone, and press your hand gently with the probe until it affects the bone slightly easily.
Remove skin from him to ease the thick phlegm from it and press the probe on the same place as it advances, and if the tumor persists by suspicion and appears clearly, this set of keys mentioned in the head should be used. A key on the side of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the temples, four on the shoulders, one large one at the elbow joint and another above it in the same arm, and two on each wrist. Two on the palms and one on each finger, and two on each foot, and one on each ankle, and a key for every joint of his hands and feet.
Preserve the nerve that is on the rear of the skull, lest you burn it. It may touch a bone in the ear, another in the mouth, and another in the abdomen. Know that every time you apply the cautery, it will be beneficial and safe.
The reason the cautery does not find its mark and the correct one does, is because the former has become hard due to aging, and it is essential that the wounds are large for the muscles and small at joints in accordance with the characteristics of the bones.
Then treat the wound with fine crushed cornsalves and other treatments until, may Allah have mercy, it heals.
Chapter Eighty Four.
In a hard wound, when a limb of one of the body's parts is affected and treated with medicines, ointments, and dressings but does not heal, it is necessary to cut off the same limb with cauterization on the bone or smaller in accordance with its size or smaller, so that the cautery may be deep in the skin a little.
Then treat it with honey until it heals, and for some hard wounds that expose the hand or leg in the chest area near the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, the wound will heal by itself.
Does not approach that except one who is skillful in the dissection of limbs and the excision of movable body cavities.
The ninth and forty-fourth chapter.
On scabies.
If scabies occurs and no remedy from the remedies of medicine works on it, then apply to it a small amount of depth so that the white disappears and its color changes.
Then it is treated with powdered cassia leaves mixed with oil of wormwood, camphor or castor oil from each part, all combined and applied to the skin until it heals. The position must be maintained until it heals.
The fifty-first chapter.
On cancer.
If cancer is at its beginning and you want to stop it, then apply a ring of lead around it as it rotates, and some scholars have said that one should apply a plaster in the middle of it, but I do not see that because I expect that it will rot and I have seen this several times.
The correct way is to apply a ring around it as we said, or with several plasters.
The hundred and fifty-first chapter.
On gout.
If a tooth becomes diseased in a patient, and it has become putrid either from the active agent causing it or from the predisposing cause, if the patient is elderly and has little blood, and you wish to hasten the extraction of the tooth, surround it with small sharp picks.
Then leave it, for it will hasten in extraction. If you wish to loosen it with a lever, prepare the mortise (mortar hole), as shown in this figure.
Pull it out in the middle of the tooth until the pulp is exposed, and place the lever below it to facilitate the extraction. Then treat it as necessary until it heals.
Chapter Two, Fifty-Six.
On the topic of leeches.
Leeches are a disease that affects the body, just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see leeches in a place where there may be a sore near a fire, prepare small and large iron mortises in accordance with what is appropriate for that location where the leech is found.
Then extract it from all sides until all the disease has been removed and there remains nothing of the leech, then leave it for three days and apply the mortar holes with powdered quicklime mixed with oil to cause the blisters and all the pus to burst.
Then treat it with a cautery for meat. If you find after three days that the meat is growing a plant properly, there is no harm in it. Otherwise, repeat the procedure on the corrupt areas, and the eater can be treated with the sharp drug.
It stands faster by fire for benefit, and I have mentioned its treatment with the sharp drug in the division section. Take it from there whenever necessary.
The third and fifty-fifth chapter.
On the subject of curved and non-curved iron needles.
This happens frequently in the soles of feet and it is something hard that a man may suffer from, and the needle is on it on two sides: either the hot needle or the sharp cold one.
As for the hot needle, it is to heat a long curved iron probe resembling an eagle's beak made of iron with a handle on both sides and sharp at the tip, then lower it onto the iron splinter from all sides and rotate your hand with the probe around the iron splinter until the probe reaches the depth of the iron splinter.
Leave it for three days to heal, then press it with a clean, sharp leech that has been salted, and leave the leech on it overnight. It will discharge from its roots, then treat the wound with fresh meat fat until it heals, provided the pins are not crossed.
It often occurs on the surface of the body, particularly on the hands and feet. A tube made of copper, iron or eagle feather should be taken and placed over the vein or artery. Then water should be poured into the tube with sufficient force to stop the bleeding.
Hold your hand firmly and press gently with your other hand to make the tube press hard against the vein, so that the water reaches the root of the vein. Allow the water to flow into the tube for a short time.
Then leave it, as the vein will discharge from its roots. Repeat this process until it has been removed from all parts of the body. Then treat the wound with fresh meat fat when it has discharged, and allow it to heal.
The Fourth and Fiftieth Section.
In case of fracture.
If any fracture happens in the bones of the arm or leg, it is required to tie four or five splints on the back between each splint and also one at the chest. And on his side, a splint with almond oil, for the fracture heals and speeds up the cold disease.
The fifth and sixth chapters.
In case of sudden internal swelling.
If sudden internal swelling occurs due to heavy, rotten, poisonous substances, it is necessary upon its appearance to tie a soft splint on each swelling and then heat the tip of the splint with fire or long ashes, or with eggshells.
The fractures occur initially in this state, and the active principle for them does not increase, but the cause of it abates except that it should be after the evacuation of the cause by cutting.
The sixth and fiftieth part.
In case of fracture when the arteries are cut.
Frequently, the fracture of a bone occurs from cutting of arteries due to injury, or breaking and wound, or any limb, etc., it becomes difficult to cut (them).
If any of these (conditions) happen to someone, hasten your hand to the place of the arteries and put your thumb on it and press firmly until the blood is confined under your thumb and nothing comes out of it, then put small and large clay pots filled with olive oil near it and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the arteries have been cut, and lower the tourniquet on the same arm after you have removed your finger with the forceps, and hold the tourniquet until the blood stops.
If the arteries are cut during your removal of a finger, and the tourniquet is released, take another tourniquet with forceps from those prepared in the fire, and continue to do so one after another until the blood stops.
And keep a knife handy in case there is no other means of treating the wound, and be aware that if the arteries release blood they will not stop it except by one of four methods: either by burning as we mentioned, or by cauterizing with a hot iron if the wound has not become putrefied. If it is putrefied and the blood is cut, or if it can be bound with strong and secure stitches, or if medicines are applied to it that have the ability to stop the bleeding and strengthen it strongly.
And as for the one who tries to stop it with ropes or by pressure, or placing heated objects near it and similar things, that wound will not be stopped except in the case of a minor injury; if anyone tries this method and no doctor or medicine is present, he should place the thumb on the wound as we described.
He must press it strongly until the blood is confined, and be cautious on top of the wound and on the arteries and veins; do not let cold strong water flow over it continuously, for fear that the blood may clot, harden, coagulate and cut off, during which time one should consider what it requires in terms of any or medicine.
The Second Chapter.
In incisions, wounds, fractures, surgeries and similar matters.
It has been said before in the first chapter that every illness can be cured with fire and burning medicine, its causes, instruments, and methods of application, as well as descriptions of cauterization tools. This is a summary from antiquity to modern times.
And in this chapter, I shall explain that path clearly for the benefit of the student.
Before I begin, it is important for you to know that this chapter deals with cauterization, which was mentioned in the first chapter on fire and burning medicine.
Therefore, it is important to take a more serious warning because the work in this chapter often involves a loss of blood which is essential for life when an artery or vein is opened or cut during an incision or wound, abscess drainage, surgical procedure, removal of a tumor or wounding on a bone or similar matters, all of which are accompanied by fear and anxiety and death occurs in many cases.
I advise you concerning the occurrence of ambiguity in your practice, indeed it may happen to you in this craft, people with quivers of needles among them, some of whom have been stricken by their disease and death approaches him.
The sharpness of his needles and the length of his incisions, and the impending illness that indicates death; among them is one who will spend for you from his wealth and benefit you with it in hope of health and the fight against his disease. Therefore, do not assist him whom you know to be of this treacherous character.
Be aware, your caution should be greater than your desire and be careful not to attempt anything of this nature without a certain knowledge that the outcome will be praiseworthy for you. Use in every treatment for your illnesses the advancement of knowledge and warning about what leads to safety.
In this matter, there is help for you in gaining praise, glory, remembrance and honor. May Allah guide you, and not deprive you of success, for that is within His power; none has the power except Him.
This chapter is long on what comes before the hand in the chapter of the foot, so that you may avoid the desire for what you seek from it if God wills.
Chapter One.
Treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
This pustule frequently occurs on the heads of children during birth, if a susceptible mother presses the head of the child without support, it may also occur due to unknown causes.
I have not seen this cause in anyone other than children, and all whom I saw from them died quickly for this reason, so I saw leaving treatment of it and I have seen children whose heads were filled with water and the head swells daily. Until the child does not sit on himself to swell his head and moisture increases until it kills him.
This moisture either gathers between the skin and bone or it gathers under the bone on the scalp, and the treatment in this case is if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, it should be opened in the center of the head with a single incision about two fingers long to relieve the moisture, and this is the appearance of the lancing.
If the moisture increases and the abscess is larger, make two connected incisions in this shape:
If the moisture is beneath the bone, and it's indicated by the fact that you see open stitches from all sides and the water lowers when you squeeze it with your hand, do not hide this. You should make three incisions in the center of the skull at this point.
After making the incisions, all the moisture comes out, then close the incisions with sutures and ointment. Leave it uncovered for the fourth day, then dissolve the stitches and treat the wound with oil and honey, do not leave the skull open for too long, and feed the patient a little dry food, low in moisture.
Until the limb recovers and becomes well, another treatment for an abscess is to look for the place where the bone of the tumor appears and collect the water that has accumulated there, as it may be deeper in the skull or more towards the rear or on the right or left side.
By incision, find the place where the tumor appears and drain the water from there, then cut into the flesh as much as you can, causing a flow that will make the patient die from the seepage along with the release of moisture.
The Second Chapter.
Division of the two arteries situated behind the well-known ears, known as the temporal.
If a sharp edged lesion appears on the eyes or chest and treatment with medication fails, then treatment for this is amputation of these two arteries.
When it is desired to cut them, the head of the patient should be shaved with a razor, then the place should be scratched roughly to make the arteries appear, then the back of the patient's head should be pressed with a thick cloth, and the location where the pulse is felt should be observed along with the two slightly sunken places behind the ears.
Then teach them to amputate both (limbs) at the joint, then cut them off at the elbow socket, divided into bones up to the skull's width. If you wish, enter the arm from below the armpits and turn it upward through cutting, with the length of the cut approximately two joined fingers.
If a finger is cut, blood will spurt out forcefully, flowing towards the face and wet clothes, unless the arteries are felt. In such case, one should measure from the ear three fingers' width, then teach amputation at the joint and cut to the bone. This should be done.
Blood will flow in streams or perhaps more or less, depending on the strength of the wound and feeling of the arteries. Then, one should look at the injury; if any part remains on the bone from the nail, it should be cut off.
To avoid a hot boil, one should lance the wound with a reed cane, then treat it with camphor until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
On the amputation of the two fingers in the palms (of the hand).
If a man develops a persistent or sharp painful swelling in the palms of his hands or fingers, or if his finger is suddenly and severely crushed and he is unable to receive proper medical treatment for it, we have found effective treatment for such conditions through amputation of the affected limbs as described previously.
The goal of the procedure is to shave the hair that is in the armpit and the visible hair on the head, for it becomes clear to you from its bleeding and the scanty hair that is not apparent among people.
If it is cold, it is hidden from you. Therefore, shave the hair of his neck by virtue of his clothes, then massage or heat the site with hot water until the hair appears clearly and distinctly. Then take the lancet that has this image. Then cut the skin with it until you reach the hair, then place a lancet in it and draw it to the top until it comes out of the skin and remove it from the scabs that are under it from every side. If the hair is fine, tilt the lancet towards one side. Then cut a piece of it to the extent that its sides are separated, bleed and do not cause bleeding but if it does not burst and is not cut, it will not flow blood at all. Then empty the blood from it with six or three poultices.
If the hair is thick, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong thread. The thread may be from a linen cloth or from the strings of a bow, so that pus does not accumulate before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then, make the incision between the sutures. Perform this at that hour or a later time, and if you wish to tie a ligature onto the bone with a fine needle until its edges grow together. This position for such an operation should be done with care or even better, as we have said.
After that, tie the ligature between the sutures. This is beneficial for preventing infection or inflammation of the wound, and it should be done after the skin is sutured. Then, the area should be bandaged with clean linen cloths, and ointment medication should be applied until healing occurs, God willing.
If, while performing your work, some blood leaks out, either cut it with a needle or fill the area with a dressing and press firmly until the bleeding stops. If no such thing occurs, place your finger over it to let the bleeding clot.
Submerge the area in cold water until the swelling subsides and press on it as necessary, and this is easier than suturing the wound with needles after learning the points of the incision.
The amputation should be performed by a skilled surgeon until it reaches the bone, and the artery should be cut in two places to allow for separation of the ends. This is not causing harm with this type of cauterization, and this is an illustration of an amputation.
The points of the cauterizing irons should resemble small needles but be less sharp, because if they were as sharp as needles, the cold would reach them faster and the flesh would not separate quickly. If there is any hesitation in their use, hold them over the fire.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this procedure is better than any other, less painful and easier. Let the space between the cauterizing irons be as wide as the width of a finger.
Chapter Four.
Treatment of chronic watery eye discharge.
If the eyes have chronic watery discharge, and treatment with medication does not relieve it, and the suspected cause is visible on the face, especially if it appears red. If there is a swelling in the eyelid similar to that of an ant-hill, and the eyes are watery and soft, such that they can be easily pierced with a needle and their lashes fall out due to the watery discharge, this is the first recourse for treatment, and it is called bloodletting, and it means ordering the suspected person to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then make three incisions in the forehead, aligned along its length. The length of each incision should be approximately two finger-widths. The first one should be located centrally in the forehead, the second one should be slightly away from the movement of the eyebrow in the temple area, and the third one should be on the opposite side.
Save the two severed vessels that are on either side and keep a distance from them. The gap between each incision should be approximately three fingers' width. Always have a prepared ligature or forceps with many fine needles to stop bleeding.
Then insert the pointed stylet, as shown in this image. From the upper incision towards the central incision, cut all the skin and fat between them using a scalpel on the bone. Repeat this process from the central incision to the lower incision, then remove the stylet. Enter the first incision with another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other. Here's what it looks like:.
The blunt side should be towards the upper part of the fat attached to the skin, and the sharp side towards the bone. Push it through until it reaches the central incision and cut all the blood vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, but do not cut through the visible skin.
Then do it in the central cavity up to the other cavity, and when the appropriate amount of blood is drawn out, the sites should be scraped from the solidified blood. Then in each cavity, there will be a purulent pus from the suppuration; oil, or fat with oil, should be placed on it.
And it should not cause a hot abscess; on the third day, the sutures dissolve and much washing with warm water is done, then it is treated with beeswax and other substances used in surgeries until it heals, by God's will.
The Fifth Chapter.
Treatment of tearducts and nasal discharges to the eyes from inside the head.
If someone has severe, burning, constant nasal discharges and their eyes appear swollen with small, weakened vision and the eyelashes fall out from them. And there is a deep-seated pain and continuous inflammation; recognize these symptoms as being due to many deep channels, and the best treatment for this is the one mentioned here: order the patient to shave their forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of it.
And there is a deep-seated pain and continuous inflammation; recognize these symptoms as being due to many deep channels, and the best treatment for this is the one mentioned here: order the patient to shave their forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of it. And slightly widen the incision from the left shoulder to the right shoulder, and let the incision be towards the bone. Keep your hand away from the moving muscles near the neck until you discover the bone and wash out all the blood with a sponge.
Separate the fat from the wound using gauze or linen, then tighten it upwards with bandages and soak it with the liquid [medicine] and oil to prevent a hot inflammation. When it has healed and you see that the hot inflammation has subsided, you should break the bone to let meat grow on it.
Then treat it with the cauterizing agent that promotes meat growth, such as taking flour made from barley and four pieces of charcoal, grind them together to make a paste which is applied for promoting meat growth in surgeries like this.
The Sixth Chapter.
Treatment of what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear can be one of four types: mineral such as stone or metal like iron and glass, or plant material like beans and grains, or liquids like water and honey, and other similar substances.
If an animal falls into the ear, a stone or something that does not belong in the ear, accept sunlight on it; if you see the stone, press oil (or wax) into it with a syringe or tweezers, then try to remove it by moving the head or vibrating with reeds. Close the ears of the patient when the pus or scabs have settled around the ear, and then tilt the head upwards; often it will be expelled by this treatment. If not, try to remove it gently with a plier, which is its shape as depicted here.
If it is removed with the plier and not, try to remove it with a thin copper funnel, its diameter being as small as possible; if this does not work either, make a tube of copper and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal.
Close the mouth of the tube with molten lead so that air does not find another way out than the tube, then draw it out with strong suction and often it will be expelled by this; if it does not come out as described above, take a feather or a thin stick that birds use to pick up small things and put it into one end of the tube.
After a boil has hardened on him, then insert it into the ear canal after the ear has dried from moisture, if it does not come out as we have described, then one should dig it before the hot swelling or inflammation occurs.
The method of digging is to press the boil in the ear canal first and make it bleed as much as its strength allows, then hold the boil between your fingers and tilt the head so that the ear is facing upward, and then dig a small hole at the bottom of the ear where it is tender.
The digging will be like a hollow sphere until it reaches the boil, then remove it with whatever tools you have, and quickly sew up the hole from where you dug, and treat it until it heals.
If the thing that fell into the ear is one of the seeds which grow and swell, try to remove it with what we have mentioned; if you cannot remove it, then grab a thin stick gently on this figure.
Try to cut that type of seeds which fell into the ear, and you only do this if you are certain that the seed has become moist with the steam of the ear until it becomes soft and in small pieces; then remove them with a pair of tweezers or a soft probe or a pincer.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove [the foreign body]. Regarding the water inside the ear, it should be treated first with olive oil or mustard oil, then plug the affected ear with some wool soaked in warm water. If the water comes out with this.
Take many small, smooth stones and warm them slightly in fire, then extract oil from one of them and insert it into the ear canal. Plug one end of a stick with this oil and strike the stone at the other end repeatedly until it breaks and falls out.
Continue this process with different stones until all the water is removed. Water can also be extracted by using a feather or reed, insert one end into the ear and heat the other end with fire until it burns more, then replace the reed with another one.
Continue this process until all the water is removed or draw out the creature within by using a syringe attached to the hole in the stone, and for removing small creatures such as a maggot, treat it as mentioned in the previous section.
If the body part is large enough to feel, attempt to extract it using forceps and curettes. It will be easier than treating anything in the ear. As for removing the pus that develops in the ear, if you have treated it as we described in the article on boils, but your treatment has not been successful.
It is necessary to observe the ear in sunlight, if something from pus appears, extract it with forceps or soft curettes. If nothing appears, take this tube-like object for examination.
Squeeze the lower part and widen the upper part, then gently insert a thin strip into the ear up to its limit. Then press firmly several times until all pus is expelled. If it does not come out, you should rotate the tube around with cotton as I have instructed in the chapter on earwax.
If it does not come out as described, use the ear drops that I have mentioned earlier in the treatment of pus and you will find them in the chapter on ear drops. Your salve and medication should be placed in the ear using this device, see its image here:.
As you can see, it is made of silver or copper, with a narrow bottom and a wide top. The plunger inside the tube should be made of hard copper, and if you wish, you can take a small rod and wrap it in cotton to press firmly.
Then, apply oil or ointment (or any desired medicine) into the ear tube (i.e., funnel), and let it be in the ear. Then enter the patient gently with your little finger and crush it (the medicine) with your fingers until fat is expelled into the depth of hearing and it becomes audible.
Then, place the hot material (that causes irritation in the ear) into a container and let it cool slightly to avoid causing discomfort or excessive heat to the ear, as the ear cannot withstand extreme cold or extreme heat.
Section Seven.
Treatment for Perforation of Ear.
Some children may be born with an undeveloped ear canal, not pierced.
Moreover, perforation in the ear canal may also occur due to injury or accumulated pus within it, and this perforation can be deep inside the ear canal, not visible by the eye.
If the perforation is near the surface and visible, it may be easier to treat, but if it's deep within the ear canal and not visible, it can be difficult to cure, and in such cases, it is advisable to expose the affected ear to sunlight. If you see the perforation clearly, open it gently with a thin tool to give the following appearance: (Illustration of ear canal and perforated area).
The edge of it should be slightly narrow, limited in some parts and wider on the other sides, so as not to harm the ear. If the wound is over the muscle, it may grow into the auditory canal, in which case grasp it gently with a thin forceps and cut it vigorously until all the flesh is removed.
If the wound is in the depth of the ear, take a thin probe gently and soften it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the auditory canal. If you feel the probe with what accompanies it of hearing loss, break it vigorously.
Preserve the hearing of the ear and fill it with a salve in proportion to the size of the wound, as is done in the Egyptian method, do that for several days until you are assured of safety from infection or take the salve and apply it to water, then crush it into powder.
If you see the ear has become inflamed and a hot boil appears on it, it is necessary to remove the salve and replace it with another that is made from castor oil until the fever subsides, then treat it until it recovers.
If bleeding occurs, immerse cotton or linen in cold water and place it on the ear and apply all treatment for stopping the mentioned bleeding as described in the chapter on cauterization.
The Eighth Chapter.
Treatment of Fistulae that Occur in the Anus.
Fistulae in the Eye, they may be moist or dry. It is necessary to grasp them with forceps or scissors and cut them from their root. Then a cataplasm should be applied to the site.
If blood comes out from it (the wound), bind it with a delicate silk suture and tie it gently after cutting, often it will return if something remains of its parts and if burned with fire, those parts will not come back.
Section Nine: If blood comes out from it (the wound), bind it with a delicate silk suture and tie it gently after cutting, often it will return if something remains of its parts and if burned with fire, those parts will not come back.
Treatment of the Cold Palsy in Orbital Fistulas.
Often, in fistulas, something resembling palsy occurs due to its stiffness and rigidity.
Therefore, it is called 'the cold' and refers to the accumulation of thick fluid in both upper and lower eyelids, work on it should be done by examining it; if the palsy is obvious on the surface of the eyelid, it should be gently pressed with a flat instrument to make a split.
Then, it should be split from all sides until it is completely cleared, then it should be tied with a linen thread and cut, unless you are able to perform the incision on the eyelid without cutting it, in which case there is no harm in that; if the split is large, collect it with sutures and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm in that; if the palsy is located near the inner surface of the eyelid, push the eyelid and tie the palsy with a linen thread without the need for incision or splitting from all sides.
If the nostril is cut through with a division, it will not cause harm, then wash the eye after cutting off the nose hairs with salty water and treat the place until the wound heals over.
The tenth chapter.
Treatment of the sinusitis that occurs in the nose near the eye.
Sinusitis is a congestion occurring in the upper layers of the nose, which affects children more and weighs on their eyes. It causes migraines during the mornings and they are unable to see clearly in the sunlight. To make the tears flow towards it.
Therefore, they lie with their faces constantly against it and sleep on it, making their eyes water. The congestion becomes visible for the eyes and when you press between them, you will feel the congestion between them. The method of treatment is to make the patient place his head on a hard object.
Then take a catgut and prepare it to become a filament, then with this filament make a circle as big as a thumbnail from all sides. Place it on him (the patient) and compress it with your fingers from all sides so that the inflammation gathers in the center of the circle.
Then make an incision in the center of this moisture with a lancet, but not larger than the incision made in the vein. Regarding depth, it is necessary to cut the skin all the way until reaching the inflammation.
In most cases, the inflammation bursts out from the incision in the form of a piece of pus the size of an egg yolk. Pull it out with catgut threaded between your fingers and rotate your hand right and north until it is completely drained. Be careful not to increase the incision so as not to harm the eye.
If the inflammation does not appear in the initial incision, it is necessary to increase the incision slightly and then wait until the inflammation appears. Then pull it out as previously mentioned, then immerse the catgut in salt water and place it on the spot and press it firmly, some people use vinegar.
He should place it in the cavity of the abscess to drain any remaining moisture, then treat it until it heals. If it becomes inflamed in its position and a hot abscess occurs, treat it with cautery until it heals.
The first tenth.
In the swellings of the eyelid.
If a swelling occurs under the eyelid beyond the natural canal and is not incised along with the normal incision and it is allowed to persist, it will damage the eye and cause swellings from diseases such as chronic conjunctivitis, stye, white discharge, pus and crust until it becomes a cause of blindness.
The swelling of the eyelid can be treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire or with a sharp tool at the opening of the canal, or by incision and suturing, or by cutting it off (as I have mentioned before).
The nasal bone should be held with your left hand, then you should pull the eyelid away from your eye with your right hand. If it does not move, insert a probe with thread from below the eyelid and pierce it with the thread above it, which will be near the hair itself and attract the thread to the top of the eyelid.
Turn it over with the forceps, then puncture in the middle of the armpit without excessive hair. Start from the largest incision to the smallest one. Tie the thread and place a small probe (either cotton or needle) under the armpit. Then, suture the armpit.
Cut it in the shape of a wing, but make sure that the shape is appropriate for raising the arm as it can vary among people, and some may require cutting from the armpit to a suitable degree according to what is comfortable for the arm to move.
For some, it may be necessary to cut less than mentioned above, depending on the ease of raising the arm. Puncture with the forceps along the marked lines, starting from the largest incision to the smallest one. The puncture should be close to the natural hair line with a groove-like appearance similar to a scratch made by the forceps.
Then, insert the scissors into one of the skin folds, cut it all and gather the threads with a needle and thin string. Wipe off the blood and attach whatever is left of the threads to the incisions using some absorbent materials.
Do what you think is best, otherwise it will not heal. The suturing and threads should remain for about three or four days then be treated. If you prefer to leave the wound untreated and treat it with something that will dry and stop bleeding, the arm will rise when the wound heals and the suture is closed and sewn more effectively.
This face is of the incision, except that it has an advantage over the ailment and it is good work and there is no danger in it. The other face in the incision too, is to learn on the belly like the shape of the as's leaf as we have described. Then raise the belly with three fingers, they should be separated or grouped on this shape:.
Then cut whatever excess from the belly with a small knife on this shape, cutting evenly:.
If you are unable to hold the fingers and you do not stand up, take a thread in a rope and insert it into the center of the shape and insert another thread near the larger knot and another thread near the smaller knot and gather the threads between your fingers evenly and then lift with the threads in an even motion.
Raise the skin that was taught on it as we have described, then gather the wound edges with the thread and treat it until it heals. If redness or inflammation appears after your cut or incision, cauterize that inflammation with a cautery iron similar to our plaster-covered bandages.
The lower belly may also return to its former shape, in which case you must use what we have described regarding cutting and stitching, cauterization with fire or a sharp medicine, or cauterization with fire or a sharp medicine to treat it more effectively than cutting and stitching alone.
Bandaging with a tourniquet should be as follows: Turn the arm and tighten the tourniquet around what you have described, then make two thin sticks or twigs of the same length as the arm and smaller in width than the arm's circumference.
The ligatures on both sides should be tied where the threads meet, then they should be pulled tightly and securely and left for some days. For the skin that is bound will die, turn black, and rot.
Keep pressing down on it until it falls out, if you have fastened the tourniquet too tightly, then loosen it and treat it until it heals, so that the arm rises and does not cause the eyes to bulge. This is the shape and size of the tourniquets in this image:.
The second chapter.
On lifting the hair from the eye with an iron hook.
If the hairs involved in this are long, take a thin iron hook and insert a fine, soft thread into it, then tie its ends together with a very fine knot, making sure that the length of the thread is about the thickness of a grain.
Then tie a thin thread around the lesion in the skin, if you wish, then place the patient's head on a stone and position it near the sun to aid the work, as this is delicate work. Then insert the lancet into the hair root of the excess hair.
Then push the lancet into the mole until it comes out from above the natural hair, then pull the thread over the lesion and insert it into the lesion whether it is one, two or three (hairs).
Then pull the lesion, along with the hair, out of the skin together with the natural hair, if you pulled the lesion and the hair did not come out with it, pull the lesion down with the thread that you tied in it until the lesion comes out from the upper hole.
Then replace the hair in it and pull them together until they rise to the upper hole so that you can see it with your eye. When this happens, cut the lesion and the thread and take them out and close the wound and leave it closed for a few days or three, until the skin heals around it and new flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, either add long natural hair to it, causing it to grow together, or leave it alone until it grows by itself, then lift it up when it has grown.
The Third Chapter.
Treatment of the Shotra (cataract) that occurs in the upper eyelid.
This cataract, called Arnbiyyah, can be either natural or acquired. The acquired cataract is due to injury or trauma, or similar causes.
The treatment for this cataract is to break the injury, separate the eyes and place a cotton wool between them until it heals, without using anything that dries or shrinks.
If you do this, the cataract will return with greater intensity or you may use things that cause irritation such as onions, garlic, water with salt and vinegar, camel urine and the dung of donkeys which have been mixed with something from a dead animal and burned to heal it.
The healers of this cataract are those who treat it with all sorts of methods, but never touch the area where it was initially, and this procedure that we have mentioned is one method to correct the cataract, not to return the initial state of the eye.
Fourth Chapter Ten.
Treatment of the hernia that is in the lower abdomen.
This hernia which is below is called in reality "hernia" and it is natural and appears open, the opening being due to injury or tear or something similar.
Procedure for it is to insert a thread in it with a strong cord and sew it into the flesh and bring it out from the left side to the right side until the cord appears at the edges of the flesh, then move the flesh upward through the cord and cut it off at an oblique angle.
If the abdomen returns to its normal shape, otherwise take a probe and place it at the site of the tear and pull the abdomen to make a new tear inside the abdomen on its inner side and let the sides of the new tears meet forming a corner from the cut that was made until they intersect forming a corner. Until it becomes similar to this shape: [No text following the colon, so that is all that needs to be translated.]
Until it becomes similar to this shape: [No text following the colon, so that is all that needs to be translated.] However, the first letter of the Greek Lambda, then remove that flesh as much as the edge below it is lower than the navel, then gather the separated parts with two sutures sewn together with thread, then treat it with the medicines we mentioned earlier for mucus and phlegm until it heals.
If the bladder was found to be torn, split or knotted in any way, it is necessary that it is sewn again simply without hair from the scrotum, before separating the two parts with phlegm as we mentioned earlier.
The statement in treating the bladder, whether it is above or below, the work should be done according to what suits its nature, for it may vary greatly in appearance, and the practitioner must consider the bladder in any way he can.
Until the shape conforms to its natural form, or it resembles it, and the disease guides you as to what suits it in most cases, regarding the work and equipment.
Chapter Fifteen.
In the treatment of eyelid injury, either suturing with catgut or using bone splints is used.
When suturing the upper eyelid, many people argue that suturing it with white thread may prevent it from moving easily and restrict its natural function. In such cases, it is recommended to make an incision under the eyelid.
The suture should be raised above or pulled through a ring, then it should be cut with a fine blade so that the cutting of the sutures is not severe but as gentle as possible to avoid irritating the eye. The stitches should be as small as possible to minimize injury to the eye.
Wait until the wound returns to its natural position and the edges join together. When that happens, pour water with salt in it or place narrow incisions filled with medicine water on it. Then, separate the wound from the eye with a reed stick.
Place cotton soaked in egg white above the eye, and after the third day use the ointments until it heals.
The Sixth Chapter.
On Cutting the Nose and Treating the Brain.
The nose can be either hard and resemble a sharp, thin piece of iron or it may not be hard, resembling thick white dough. If struck with iron or grabbed with pincers, it splits.
If there is no pincers in it, both types should start from the larger cavity and move gradually until the observer and light and eye movement are blocked. The work should be done with the worker's head resting on a stone.
Then, open his eyes and lift the upper eyelid with your hand. Take a pair of pincers with small tips and push it upwards. Next, take a catgut thread and insert some hair from the horse or cow into it, along with a strong cord. Twist the end of the catgut slightly and tie it in the middle of the nose.
Perform it with an awl, tie it with silk thread and pull it upwards, then break the hair next to the wound as if you are spreading it with the hair until the end, then cut the rest in the center of the wound with a delicate pin or a small needle and leave the natural flesh of the wound.
In order to prevent continuous bleeding, the wound is pulled with a probe or thread as mentioned earlier, then it is tied with a soft cord or thin string and the image shows the position of the knot.
Keep the probe from touching the cornea with a horny bandage, as it causes inflammation and can lead to infection, then after cutting it, put something made of salt or fine powdered antimony in the eye and leave it for some time before treating it properly so that it heals.
If the wound is not deep and cannot be penetrated with an awl or held with a probe, this type of wound is often treated with medicine as described in the classification section, and if you wish to cut it, open the patient's other eye.
Take a delicate soft probe with a small sharp tip as shown in this image:. If a snakebite occurs on top of the hand, if you see that it is swelling and splitting and there is pus in it, squeeze from your hour glass into the eye from the zanjabil or red scissors or salt powder and close the eye until the last day.
Then, continue the work on it until all of it goes away except if it resists in the eye and causes a hot inflammation; leave it alone and treat the hot inflammation until it subsides, then continue the work on it with pus until it subsides, as for fat from meat,...
If the fat from meat harms the eye severely, tie that piece of fat with thread and cut a portion off it without causing bleeding, then squeeze in the eye from the red scissors or zanjabil until it subsides.
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter.
On cutting the worms and anything that grows excessively in the eye from the flesh.
In some people, flesh of a reddish color may grow in the eye until it covers the viewer or resembles the worm of the scorpion, and possibly the eyelids will turn outwards and it will resemble a scorpio worm.
The work involves placing the ailment's head in your stone, then opening its eye and collecting all the red flesh with compatible scissors.
The work involves grasping it with forceps or tongs, then cutting the flesh first and continuing until all is cut off, making sure to preserve the eye so as not to harm it during the procedure. Your cut should either be with the instrument we described for cutting through bone (fracture saw) or with small pliers. It involves grabbing it with the probe as it appears in this following image.
If your cut is complete and all the veins have been severed, fill the eye with sharp salt or place red and similar medicinal substances in it, then cover it with a piece of white cloth to protect from heat.
If there remains any vein or blood and you fear heat, leave the eye alone and treat it to alleviate the pain, then continue work until it is safe to proceed. Similarly, make incisions in the excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type.
It is necessary that you avoid treating any weak eye with either enucleation (removal of the eye) or incision by metal work, and do not enter anything related to these operations until you see that the limb is suitable for such procedure.
The Tenth Chapter.
In the Incision of the Nose.
In the Incision of the Nose: If the incision is reddish and swells on the eye to obstruct vision, do it (the procedure) and if the eye weakens over days, then first examine it. If the eye in which the incision is strong and there is no other disease except the incision itself.
Here, the incision is to command the patient to place his head on your stone, then bind those veins with a single or two snares according to your need. The snares should be gentle in tightening on this image.
or bind two snares together in one body on this image.
Then pinch those veins gently with a soft thread and wipe the blood as soon as possible until you see blood coming out from it, then take away those veins without damaging them and let the blood flow, keep the eye safe from being harmed by the edges of the thread and make your work at noon facing the sun.
Ensure that you only cut those veins and not others when there is a gap, then press on the green or red vein to eat up what remains of the path. If it is not possible for you to tie it all in that hour, apply pressure to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye.
Leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot worm is calmed, then perform work on it in this manner with caution until this image of the painful thread avoids it.
Leave it [and let the head of the incision be in the student's stone, and let the last to flow be tears, and let it pierce the root and the back of the eye, and let the original be in the work. The principle in operation is that the eye should be opened by opening its fixed apertures or triangular ones, the student holding them.]
Start (the incision) and let the head of the incision be in the student's stone, and let the last to flow be tears, and let it pierce the root and the back of the eye, and let the original be in the work. The choice is to start from above or below the eye, but the first one should be a cut in the upper eyelid which will be one at the end of the eyeball and the other in the lower (eyelid) to pierce the corner of the eye.
Hold it between the middle and the backside, then apply pressure points under them, then hold it between the lacrimal and the canthus, and move your hand gently until you feel the path is clear, then make a cut from the lesser occiput if you are using a knife or use a thumb if it's more gentle.
Break open the cyst on its apex and follow the path until it rises to the surface, do not cut the flow of tears or blood as they will gush out on you.
Then, cut with the lancet whatever is added to the incision from above and below until there remains nothing but the cartilage within the nostril. If possible, lift it from above the cartilage. This is better and may heal in some people.
If cut, it becomes inflamed and harbors pus and fever for some days then return to the operation on it.
The Tenth Chapter.
Treatment of a Nosebleed.
Nosebleeds are called nar by physicians. If treated with the cautery or astringent medications without improvement, there is no remedy except to apply heat to the inflammation as it occurs and extract all the moisture or pus that is in it.
Until the bone is exposed. If the bone is exposed and you see it is black or discolored, expel it with this instrument (illustrated below).
The instrument for the nasal polyp is made of Indian iron and has a revolving head, which can be engraved with either a drill or scalpel, finely etched. It should be placed on the site of the discoloration in the bone then rotated between your fingers while you hold it slightly until you know that the discoloration has been expelled.
Perform this procedure multiple times, then force the location with tightening drugs. If the location is sutured and meat grows within it, the flow ceases and remains for forty days without renewal or pain, and no incident happens in it.
Know that it is clean, otherwise there is no remedy except for the Nasir to return to the nostril hole on this condition that he uncovers the second bone with iron or sharp drug. If the bone is uncovered, grasp a probe on this shape:.
The tip of the iron should be triangular and its cone-shaped handle inclined towards the tip as you see, then place it on the bone which is close to the nostril and slightly away from the eye. Then press your finger with the probe until the bone emerges and feels the pain.
If air comes out when you press on the nose, then force the place with tight and dry medicines as you know, if the flesh swells and the spot hardens, it is likely that what was pushing out to the outside will return to the nose. This will be easier on the cause, if God wills.
If air comes out when you press on the nose, then force the place with tight and dry medicines as you know, if the flesh swells and the spot hardens, it is likely that what was pushing out to the outside will return to the nose. This will be easier on the cause, if God wills.
Excision of the Eye.
If the whole eye is excised and no damage occurs to the vision or any defect remains, it is necessary to anesthetize first, then remove it through the nostril. After that, a small piece of bone should be placed in the socket without any specific rule, and it should be covered with a thin layer of skin.
Then, on the eye, place a plug made of lead, copper, and tin, and antimony. After that, press the eye down onto the cheeks with great benefits. The recipe for the benefits is to take a large amount of leech juice and apply it to each hole made from it on four small pieces made from it.
Then, place one of them on the other according to what the eye requires, then press hard and strong with a strong plug made from bone. After that, cover the bone piece with the thin layer of skin and leave it closed for a day or night.
If the ligature is tied during this process, it must be pressed firmly. After a day or night, if you see that the eye has returned, then it is sufficient, otherwise repeat the procedure of the cheeks, benefits, and pressure until it returns.
Chapter Ten and Forty.
On the Castration of Boys.
If the scrotum is stretched out in the operation of castration, then the testicles are brought out like a bag and its appearance resembles that of a man. And if you wish to cut it, the work should be done according to what was described.
And it is to insert a thread through the bottom of the scrotum towards the top, then insert another thread in it with a twist on one side and pull it through. Leave the first thread as it is.
Then, cut the place where the twisted thread is and tie a piece of the scrotum around it tightly. When the thread is pulled out, put cotton soaked in white egg-white over the eye and leave it until the threads along with the scrotum fall off. Then treat the eye as necessary.
Until the wound heals, and the scrotum should be squeezed from all sides with a circular motion until it becomes swollen. Then, tie a thin cord to reach the inner corner of the eye, allowing the egg-white moisture to seep out, and the eye will descend and swell up in that place. Squeeze it until it heals.
Chapter Twelve and Forty.
In treatment of ulcers.
This ulcer, which is called the kemenah, is only a collection that occurs in the eye and is not water, and the procedure for this is to make the patient sit on a raised chair, then take his head with both hands from both sides.
Move him until the collection appears below your sight, then stabilize and do not let go. Light will emerge and the patient will see things as he used to see them. If it does not descend to the bottom, we know that it is water, if the descent of the collection does not happen as we have mentioned.
Unless (the patient) sits between your hands, then take a sharp probe and pierce it above the eyelid slightly near the place of contact with the cornea in the eyelid until the material comes out.
When it comes out, squeeze it in the eye with hot water that has been mixed with honey or milk and honey, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
The third and forty-first section.
We have mentioned the types of water, and one of them is suitable for treatment with smooth, explained speech. Take it from there in a healthy state. At this point, it is necessary that the patient sits between your hands facing the light close to the sun.
Connect the normal eye and tighten it firmly, then lift the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if it is the eye containing water (left eye), or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then, place the edge of the probe near the eyelash on the same side as the smaller inner canthus, then push the probe with force while you guide it until it enters the eye and you feel that it has reached something empty.
It is necessary that the probe should go to a depth equal to the distance from the cornea to the back of the eyelid, because copper can be seen by the observer as the eye appears covered with a transparent membrane; then the probe should be brought up to the position where there is water.
Then squeeze it down repeatedly, if the water comes out of its hole, then the observer will see what opens before his eyes and the probe is in his eye, then he remains still for a moment; if the water rises again, he must lower it without removing the probe.
If it remains still and does not rise, then the probe is removed slowly with gentle touching, and a small amount of pure iodine is dissolved in water and used to wash the inside of the eye; then all of the wash solution should be drained out, either with a gauze or a clean cloth.
Skin and white as egg with a healthy eye connected, as for us and our contemporaries, we place the pointed canthus on it, if it is not necessary to be softened for entry into the eye because some people have very hard eyes. Must take the probe named al-braid, here is its image:.
You must pierce it with the probe only and do not move during the process, as it is to soften the spot, then enter the probe into the softened area as mentioned earlier, when you are done prepare a cat for anesthesia, place it gently on its back sleeping in a dark room.
He should abstain from all movements and anxiety, make food that suits its nature and do not move its head to the right or left, and keep it tied in that state until the third day then release it in that dark room and try with its eye.
He should look at objects, then tie it up again until the seventh day, and it is not appropriate to do that during treatment or after bleeding from your time but it is appropriate to avoid that before the water rises quickly due to strong gaze.
If a boil or abscess is hot in the eye, it is necessary that the eye be lanced before the seventh (day) and this can be done by letting what dwells in the abscess out until it has been let out, then he should wash his eyes with water and put a gauze over it for some days while he is in the dark room.
The patient leaves the house gradually and finds out the cause of his ailment, and be informed that perspiration is not beneficial in such cases. When he presents for treatment, it has been reported to me from some Iraqis that they make a lancing pouch to draw water with it.
I have not seen anyone in our country make this, nor has it been read in any of the early books. It may be a recent development. This is an image of various types of plasters for ignorance.
It is made of copper specifically, and its edge is in this triangular shape with a sharp corner.
The fourth and forty-fourth chapter.
Treatment of the swollen flesh in the nose.
Swelling in the nose can occur due to various excess fleshes resembling many legs of scorpions, among which may be a cancerous hard meat similar to bone color and among which may be a white non-bone like flesh.
Do not peel any of these meats that are not unwholesome or cancerous. The patient should sit with his face towards the sun, and you should open the incision. Place a probe into the meat, then draw it out gently from one side.
If all the meat has been removed, and there remains something that you have not been able to cut off, pull it out with a fine instrument until nothing remains of it. If bleeding or inflammation occurs, apply cold water.
If there is an abscess that needs to be opened, make a small incision and remove all the pus until the bleeding stops and all the meat is gone. Then, in the nasal cavity after the incision, place a clean cloth or liquid, but if the nose opens and the moisture goes into the wound, seal it with a ligature.
If the boil has burst, if the pus does not drain as needed, then understand that meat is trapped in the upper bone that the instrument cannot reach. In this case, it is necessary to take a cord of catgut.
And tie a cord tightly in it with many knots, making each knot as large or smaller than a finger. The patient should hold one end of the cord in his nose with his fingers or as possible after it is made like a thumb, and draw air until it reaches the wound.
The excerpt translates to: "He (the patient) pulls on the incision, and it often happens that young ones in the book do this action, which is easy for those who wish to do so. Then, the edges of the thread, one that came out of the mouth and the other that remains in the nose, are gathered.
The excerpt translates to: "Then, the meat is sutured with the thread that is in the thread, until you learn that the meat has been cut by the thread. Then, the thread comes out and remains in the nose after cleaning the blood, so for three days or more, [they] do that in the Egyptian mummy.
The excerpt translates to: "Until the mummy eats all that remains of the meat, then there remains a pipe made of lead in the nose for days until it passes through, if he needs treatment, this is done.
This excerpt translates to: "This is a picture of the nasal snuff container, in which medications are put.
The excerpt translates to: "He puts a small tube made of silver or copper, open at both ends and curved in shape.
The excerpt translates to: "If you wish, you can make the tube closed like a vessel and the snuff container open.
"He has a ligature at the end, as you see, he holds it when speaking about oil or whatever vessels or fragile things.
"The Fifth and Fortieth Chapter.
"In the sinuses of the nose, on the side of the nostrils.
"Very often, pus grows on the side of the nostrils and increases with days until it becomes noticeable.
"Therefore, it is recommended to cut it as soon as it appears and drain all of it, then put on the place either sulphur or a burning medicine that takes the place of sulphur, for if it is not cut while still small, it will grow larger; so look at it carefully. If it becomes hard like lead with little sensation,
"Do not expose it to iron, for it is a malignant cancer; often you will see from cutting this cancer that it returns with great swelling on the patient, and even if the cancer is white and soft, cutting it can be done in all cases. "Empty the cavity and cut it without hesitation or delay, then treat the place with what dries and absorbs until it heals.
"The Sixth and Fortieth Chapter.
In the sewing of the nose, the eye and the ear. If they are disconnected due to injury or similar, know that work can only be done in some people for one of these organs.
Whenever something of this kind is presented, look if the injury is clean or not. If it is a clean wound, both eyes should be united with sewing, then treated until it heals. But if the connection is broken and each part is healthy separately, each gap should be cut with a scalpel to the surface skin until it bleeds.
Then the two eyes are sewn together and pressed, and powdered antimony and white lead are rubbed on it. From above the eyelids, a paste made from resin or another adhesive is applied and left for one to three days, then it is dissolved.
Then the medication is left until the stitches dissolve themselves, then they are treated with ointment until they heal. The method of sewing can be by silk as described in the abdominal suturing or by thread as you know here.
Chapter Seven and Forty.
On the extraction of the cataract which occurs in the eyes.
There may appear in the interior of some people small, hard stone-like ulcers which resemble some of them with corns and some of them smaller or larger. It is necessary to turn the eye and press on every stone and tie it with a string.
They are cut from every side, then the place is filled with powder after cutting until the blood stops and it is pressed with salt, and the wounds are treated with what is necessary until they heal.
Chapter Eight and Ten.
In excess fat removal from meat.
In excess fat that protrudes on the surface of meat, it is called "aw'il" (excess fat). It should be bound with a string or held with a hook and cut at its root. Leave the skin or blood behind, then place it over the spot ground up as a dust.
Or one of the contracted dry wounds, if the meat returns after treatment, it often recurs. Therefore, cut it a second time and cauterize it, for it will not return after cauterization.
The ninth and tenth chapters.
On filing of teeth with iron.
Inside and outside the surfaces of teeth, there may be coarse layers that are harmful, darken, whiten or turn yellow until it reaches such a state that causes decay to the tooth and loosens the teeth because of it.
The patient should sit between your hands, with his head on the stone, and you should file the tooth and the root that has appeared to you, containing coarse layers and sand-like substances until nothing remains from it. Similarly, do the same for black teeth, green teeth, yellow teeth and so forth until clean.
If you remove the gold from it, the wound will return after a few days and then again on the third day until it reaches the goal that you desire. Know that each tooth requires different tools of various shapes according to what suits your work.
For the reason that the drill which drills the tooth from inside is not the same as the drill which drills it from outside, and the one which drills between the teeth is another kind, among these are various types of drills you should have all of them equipped.
Chapter Thirty.
On Extraction of Teeth.
It is necessary to treat the tooth from its pain by every means, and it is possible not to extract it if there is no need for extraction since it is noble until it becomes necessary to extract it.
If the cause for extraction is firm, it is necessary that you confirm the tooth's pain so that the tooth becomes sound with you. Often, the cause for pain is deceived and it is thought that it is in a healthy tooth, so it is extracted, but the pain does not go away until the sick tooth is extracted; we have seen this many times from the actions of the dentists.
If the tooth's pain is clear with you, then it is necessary to tighten around the tooth with a grip in it with some strength until the pus is discharged from all sides, then move it with your fingers or soft tweezers gently back and forth until it loosens.
Then, when the larger dogs are enabled, we enable it well and place the patient's leg between them so that they may grip it firmly, rendering it motionless. Thereafter, we attract the tooth on a steady basis to avoid breaking it. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it beneath from all sides with a twisting motion, as you did initially.
If the tooth is firmly fixed or embedded, it is necessary to fill the cavity with a plug made of soft material, such as cotton wool, and pack it tightly with tweezers. Be careful not to damage the surrounding tissues while you apply pressure with the dogs (forceps). The packing must be done gradually from all sides.
Keep your effort consistent so as not to break it again, and let some of the pain remain in the patient from the first wound, for this is greater than the subsequent pains. Ensure that the forceps are made as previously described and used only as we have instructed.
It often happens that people suffer from severe pain when a tooth breaks and the root remains intact or in part. If part of the jaw bone is fractured as we have seen many times, and swelling occurs after the fracture due to drinking or eating spicy and salty food, then if bleeding occurs from the site, press something made of wool or a clean cloth on it immediately.
If the forceps do not help you, use a pair of delicate scissors whose tips are long and narrow with strong blades lest they bend when you grip them on the tooth. These are large scissors.
If the pliers do not help you, use a pair of strong pliers with narrow tips lest they bend or break. They should be made of hard iron or steel and have serrated edges that interlock securely when closing.
The tips may be designed like a tongs for added strength.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of broken teeth and their roots.
If the root of a tooth remains after extraction, it should be packed with oil-soaked cotton for a day or two to promote healing before inserting forceps or scissors. whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called a "billhook" and these are large scissors.
If the tooth cannot be removed with these large scissors, make an incision on the root and remove all the flesh with a probe, then insert the small tool that resembles a drill, shown here:.
Short edge is slightly thick and should not be sharp to prevent it from breaking. If the core comes out, use these other tools as shown in their images, the first one being a triangular one with some thickness.
Image of another triangular one:.
And we may also use this tool with two prongs as shown in its image too:.
And besides these tools and instruments mentioned in the veins' section, we may also use this tool resembling a large scissors as shown in its image too:.
A slightly thick and not sharp triangular probe is used, so that it does not break. Know that the instruments of veins are numerous, as well as other tools. The craftsman who practices surgery may invent for himself tools according to what his work requires and the diseases he encounters.
Since some diseases may not have been described with tools for their specific types, if a bone in the jaw or one of the facial bones is broken or dislocated, examine it in its place using whatever of these tools and pliers mentioned for extracting cores that are suitable for the case.
We use this device for examination. (Translation of the excerpt from Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
In it, there should be a little hardness to fix the bone so that it does not move until the bone is removed, and we force the location with appropriate medicines, for if the bone has pus, we expel it from the pus and blood until it is clean, then we treat it until it heals. (Translation of the excerpt from Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
The Second and Thirtieth Chapter. (Translation of the section title in Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
In the treatment of abscesses on other than teeth. (Translation of the excerpt in Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
If abscesses occur on any part other than their natural location, it is harmful and if this happens in women or the elderly, it is necessary to examine [the affected area], for if the tooth has erupted from behind another tooth. (Translation of the excerpt in Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
If it cannot be opened or drained, extract it, and if it is attached to another tooth, cut it with this device whose image is shown here. (Translation of the excerpt in Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
It resembles a small saw and is made of strong Indian iron with very sharp edges, cut it in several days depending on the hardness of the tooth to prevent other abscesses from forming, and if possible, drain it with a copper syringe whose image is shown here. (Translation of the excerpt in Albucasis's Arabic textbook on surgery)
It should be made of silver and finely engraved, like the probe used for cauterization, it should slightly cool the tooth over several days without causing it to crack. Then it should be left alone to heal and occasionally rubbed with some ointment.
If a tooth has been broken, causing pain to the tongue during speech, it should be cooled until the pain subsides and the fracture heals. It should then be smoothed out without causing further pain to the tongue or damaging speech.
Third and Thirtieth Chapter.
In wire-tying mobile teeth with silver or gold threads.
If immobile teeth are sensitive and move due to a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything to prevent it from falling out, and treatment with binding medications has not been effective.
The solution is to tie it with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver softens and weakens after several days while gold remains the same and does not pose the same risk. The thread should be medium-thickness in the knot and firmly placed between the teeth.
The illustration of suturing: take the thread and insert it between the correct teeth, then sew along the edges of the moving teeth with one or more until you reach the correct tooth from the other side with the suture.
Return the suture to the side from where you started and press and hold firmly so that the tooth does not move, then tighten the thread at the roots of the teeth lest it loosen, then cut one end of the thread with scissors and tie them together and knot them inside the correct tooth and moving tooth.
In order to prevent the tongue from being damaged, leave it thus secured, for if it should swell or break, you will have it thus for its duration; this is a representation of teeth and suturing in two correct and moving teeth as you see here:
One or more teeth may fall out after they have been displaced in their position and sutured as described, and thus remain; this is the work of a false tooth maker, who makes it from the bone of cattle, placing it in the position from which the tooth has fallen. He should press as we have said before and enjoy this state.
The Fourth Chapter, the Thirtieth.
On the cutting of a ligament which is beneath the tongue in preventing speech.
This ligament which is beneath the tongue may either be innate or arise due to injury.
The procedure is to open the mouth of the sufferer and expose the ligament's tip in your palm, then raise his tongue. After that, cut the ligament with a sharp tool until the tongue can be released from its bondage. If there is some stiffness or tightness, it is due to injury, so you should apply heat to it and cut it off gradually until the ligament separates and the bond breaks apart.
"Be cautious if the incision is in the muscle depth, cut there the veins will be exposed. Then press in its place with warm water or oil and cold water, then put beneath the tongue a piece of cedar wood which should be held by an assistant every night.
"If the wound is not closed immediately, bleeding will occur if it happens, put on the spot a piece of lime mixed with flour which can stop the bleeding. "Then treat it with all the remedies until it heals.
"Chapter 53.
"On the extraction of a tooth that has erupted beneath the tongue.
"A swelling resembling a small tooth that may prevent the tongue from performing its natural function and may fill the mouth. Treatment is to open the mouth of the assistant facing the sun and examine the swelling.
"If you see it as reddish or black and hard, the assistant cannot feel it, then do not approach it because it is cancer. If it is slightly white and moist, press it gently with a probe and extract it from all sides.
"If bleeding occurs during the operation, put lime mixed with flour on it until the bleeding stops, then return to the operation until you completely extract it and press it with salt afterwards.
Then treat it with all the agreed-upon treatments until it heals up.
The sixth and thirty chapter.
On the treatment of scrotal worms.
When a boil appears in the inguinal region, it may contain worms similar to those that appear externally (scrotal worms), if they are treated as described in the division, they do not heal.
If the worm is hard like lead with little sensation, do not apply iron to it. If it is red in color and its core is firm, also do not apply iron to it out of fear of bleeding. Instead, leave it until it heals. Either bind it or let it explode on its own.
If it is white in color and its core is soft, this is what needs to be cut off. The procedure for dealing with it is to check before operating whether the worm has settled or if there are any deficiencies.
When the patient is seated on a solar bed with his head against a stone, open the mouth and take an assistant between your hands. Press the tongue downwards using this instrument whose figure is shown below.
Make from silver or copper, that is sharp like a scalpel. If you press it against the tongue and the worm is revealed to you and you see it with your eye, then take a lancet and prick it in the boil and draw it out as much as possible without also drawing any of the pus along with it.
Then cut it with this tool, its shape resembles a pincer, but each of its sides has a very sharp edge made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.
If this tool is not available, then cut it with a pair of scissors having this shape.
A lancet is sharp on one side and blunt on the other, when a boil is cut open with it, then the following boil should be cut in the same manner. After cutting, clean the area with cold water or vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding, clean it with vinegar or the leaves of onions, or something similar from herbs until the bleeding stops. Then treat it until it heals. In case other boils appear besides these two, they should be cut in the same manner as described for cutting the boils, no matter what kind they are.
The woman had a boil that had grown inside her head, causing slight pain. It seemed as if it might burst and the woman was short of breath from a narrow passageway, and she could not eat or drink water.
The boil had risen from her for several days until it came out on her nostril, so I used a lancet and pricked one of them, then pulled out a healthy piece from it.
Then I cut it where I found it from the nostril, then did the same with the boil on the other side, then I opened her mouth and held her tongue, then I pricked the lancet in the same boil, then cut a piece from it, but it only bled smoothly.
The woman's boil burst and she drank water immediately, then regained her appetite, but the boil did not recur for a long period of time, and it left behind what was cut until it healed completely, with that.
I dissolved the boil inside her head and it stopped growing, then she traveled away from that place, and I did not know what Allah had done with her after that.
Chapter Seven and Thirty.
On the cutting and cauterization of hemorrhoids.
If it is named 'anbata' when it descends from its place to the hemorrhoids and it swells and becomes elongated, it is called 'umuda'. If it is thick at the lower end, it is called anbata. If it is squeezed as described in the section on ligation, but no improvement results, treatment has failed.
If the inflammation of hemorrhoids is hot, it should be suspected that it has taken residence and become tender. In such a case, it should be incised, provided it is not compacted and elongated and does not have a length, nor is it blood-colored or of the color of pus or black, or it has no sensation. In this case, it should be avoided to incise it.
If you find the anbata on the characteristics as mentioned before (i.e., white and long), the patient should be seated with the hemorrhoid exposed to sunlight, then its base should be compressed with the instrument described earlier, and then the ligature is tied around the hemorrhoid.
It should be drawn down and incised with one of the two instruments mentioned in the section on castration, but it should not be incised except what is natural without any excess, for if you incise more, you will harm it by sound and speech.
After the cut, use what we have described in the treatment of wounds and heal them until they are well, if pus appears from the wound, it is necessary to apply a lancet to it without fear or caution, and place the head of the pestle in it, for it is a sharp medicine, and it is to put the head of the pestle in it.
Then squeeze the tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take from the sharp water you have described in the chapter of lancet, and grind it into a paste that is not too hot nor cold, make a small quantity of this paste and fill this instrument with it. Here is its image:.
The side of the instrument where the medicine is placed has a hollow like a spoon-sized depression, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself, and put the patient in a prone position so that anything inside the wound does not slip out when you move it, preventing any injury.
Then hold the medicine with one hand and rub it on the wound for about half an hour until it turns black and settles in, if you wish to use a bandage, dip it in the medicine and apply it to the wound.
The intestine enters into a tube from above, until the intestine adheres to the surrounding tissue. This is done repeatedly until you reach the desired amount of intestine. Then leave it; if it swells and breaks after three or four days, return the medicine.
After reaching the desired amount, you wipe around the intestine with a dampened cotton soaked in oil and apply the medicine around it. Then immerse it in cold water and treat it from outside with hot fomentations and from inside with leeches until it bursts. This type of treatment is called cutting and is superior to fear.
Wounds are also treated with a milder form of the knife, and cuts are treated with cautery on this basis. Take the fat of a sheep or cow, pulverize it, mix it with pitch, resin, sulfur, charcoal, vinegar, and other such substances, then put them all together or some of them in a pot and immerse it in the ashes.
The cavity should be clear and well defined in the middle of the covering, there should be a hole where the instrument, which is straight and made of gold or copper, will be placed.
The side containing the worm should be opened in the mouth of the patient until steam rises to the nose through the tubing until the boil is ready, then you repeat this process until it bursts. This treatment should be performed as soon as the worm appears.
If the worm multiplies in number, it is better to perform this procedure when the worm is hot. However, if this device is not available, take a splinter, insert it into one side of it, and put an eggshell there so as not to burn the patient's mouth.
The eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth, and this is one of the good treatments with safety.
Chapter Eighty-third.
On the extraction of shoik (gallstones) and other objects that may appear in the urinary tract.
Often, bones or gallstones made of some other material may appear in the urinary tract. In such cases, it is necessary to extract what can be seen under the vision after pressing the tongue with the instrument in the sun.
In order to clarify what is in the incision, and what has not appeared to you during the incision, it is necessary that you tie off the vessel before its food enters its lumen; otherwise, the thing might explode with the tying or the vessel might tear apart, either at the site of tying or at the root.
To soften a dry piece of bread or take a piece from the soft sea sponge, tie it up in thread then soak it; when you reach the site of the wound, quickly pull the thread and perform this action repeatedly.
Often, the wound or bone sticks together and does not come out as we have mentioned; in such cases, use an instrument made of lead as shown here:.
Make the probe slightly sharper than a needle and on its side there is an opening where the vessel enters during incision with a support that raises its tip to above; it protects the probe from being damaged and prevents any damage, and pushes the bone or wound, or the doctor can insert his hand through it.
The introduction of the vessel allows for better knowledge of the location of the thing to be found and it can push it down or pull its hand with the instrument towards above, according to what is appropriate for him until it comes out.
The Ninth and Thirtieth Chapter.
Extraction of a Protruding Aneurysm in the Incision.
If an aneurysm is treated as described in the section on treatment with drugs, and it does not heal, then look at the incision site exposed to the sun after compressing it with the instrument previously described for you.
If you see the aneurysm, draw it with a small hook or a fine, firm probe, and if you cannot do so, then take a stiff catheter and insert it into the incision close to the aneurysm. Then insert iron rods covered in fire into the catheter.
Perform it several times, and let the patient abstain from water on his entire day, then take a syringe filled with cold water and open his mouth in it and swirl it around without expelling any of it, and move the water after he has held it in his hand.
The pus will fall on the spot if you feel the water, and if it does not come out as we described, then it will cause the wound to rot and to be removed by the tool that we described in the book of leeches. Repeat this process until it falls.
The method in leeching is to take a container with a quantity of hot vinegar covered and in its center there should be a hole. Then the tool is placed in that hole. When the leeching is done, the patient opens his mouth on the side of the tube and closes it so that the leech does not come out until he knows that the leech has reached his wound.
If the pus does not fall, then leeching should be repeated and the patient should fast and eat salt and garlic and drink nothing. It is certain that it will come out with this treatment. This is a picture of an instrument that attracts pus from the wound if it falls on it.
It resembles a burn, except that it has this sensation which penetrates the skin and its edges resemble the beak of a bird; in it there is pain from the cold if something is placed upon it.
Another instrument compresses the tongue, and it is a wide incision made from iron as much as the mouth above the tongue, which enters into the mouth standing upright on its side; the mouth remains open without intention, and the bite cannot force it closed until it has been relieved.
Characteristics of the instrument which opens the mouth to this measure with certainty.
Chapter Forty.
In the throat, make a laryngotomy and cut it open.
The throats have various types, each described differently in this book and they differ in their position and shape from two aspects: one of which is a type of worm in the throat that contains no secretions.
The second type is due to the places from where the body communicates, since a worm in the head is not the same as a worm in the neck and a worm in a place of heat is not the same as a worm in a cold location; for each of them a judgment is made regarding the treatment.
Among the abscesses, it is not advisable to lance them except after pus has formed within and their completion, and among them, those that need to be lanced are those which were not completely resolved, such as the abscesses that are close to the joints.
In case an abscess occurs near a joint and its duration is prolonged, the ligaments or bones of that joint may be damaged, causing the joint to become incapacitated for a long time or the abscess may be close to a body part.
Because if you postpone lancing until it is completely resolved, you may damage the head of that bone or it may be close to a socket. Therefore, lance it intentionally and it is necessary to lance an abscess which has not completely resolved before the pus reaches the socket as this will cause inflammation inside the socket and cause it to become blind.
It will appear in some cases, and it is necessary to learn the time of lancing abscesses that have completely resolved, which is when the pain of the abscess subsides and the pus disappears along with the redness, swelling, and hardening of the abscess's tip and all other symptoms.
It is necessary to expect the lancing to be made in a location below the abscess if possible as it will be easier to move downwards or in a deeper location and stronger needle, and the lance should travel along the body length if the abscesses are located near the hands and legs.
Locations of limbs, vessels, nerves, veins and joints in all leveled places without defect, but for those that have a defect, go with the plaster accordingly. If worm is in fleshy locations, it's better to leave the plaster.
Leave the plaster until it dries completely, as we have said before, but if you bandage it before that, the snake venom may leak out and there could be swelling and blistering, possibly causing the eye to cloud over or blindness. Some wounds may require the plaster to be applied directly on the body or to the limb depending on necessity.
It is recommended to use a single bandage for small wounds and a wider or multiple bandages for large wounds according to the size of the worm, and some wounds may require that the skin be sutured and cut if it has become like a hole.
It has become like something that often occurs in many prisons and dungeons, and among them are some that split in three sections and others that are cut into the shape of a sheep's hide like scabies mites.
Among them (operations) is one that uses the continuous incision and crescent-shaped incisions, and others similar to these, as well as those which do not have a rounded tip like abscesses in the soft tissues. If it does not have a head like boils, it should be pressed gently, but if the boil is large and has been long in duration and pressing it causes no effect, all the pus should be extracted at that time.
If the abscess has not been drained for a long time, then some of its pus should be removed each day gradually until all of it is expelled.
Definitely, if the patient is weak in strength, or a woman who is pregnant or a child who is young or an old man who is feeble, animal spirits often escape with the removal of pus in one go. Therefore, beware of this matter, be extremely cautious.
After pressing these boils, it is necessary to examine the wound. If the boil is small or if the incision was made once and is simple, use a cotton swab from the chest or wool to clean the wound. If the boil is large and there are multiple incisions.
It is necessary to enter every abscess cavity until they are connected with each other, and if the worm has been cut from the skin or enclosed in it, it is necessary to pack it with wool or dry cotton from the third day onward.
After removing it and treating it with whatever is appropriate for the wound until it heals, if there is a flow of blood during your treatment, use cold water and clay after drinking them both and place a piece of cotton on the wound several times.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to perform treatment and use the remedies that we have described in many places of our book and in other sources, if you are in cold weather and the location of the worm is hard to find, it is necessary to warm up the remedies with hot oil.
Place them on the location, and if you are in the summer and the locations are sweaty, it is necessary to apply remedies that are drinkable with water and oil or cold drinks until the third day as we have mentioned, at which point it is necessary to dissolve the worm and cleanse it.
It is used in treatment until it heals, this does not require knowledge of the treatment for abscesses collectively, however, I have mentioned each abscess with its specific treatment in summary form.
The First Forty Section.
In the incision on abscesses that occur in the skin of the head.
Abscesses that occur in the skin of the head are small and belong to the category of pus pockets, they have conditions similar to those of a chicken egg, and their types are numerous, one of which is suppurative, and another that contains moisture resembling cheese.
And among them are some that contain moisture resembling yogurt and cheese, as well as some hardened ones, all of which do not pose a danger when incised or extracted without causing pain.
The procedure for incision should first be done with the tool that resembles its image, which is called the "mess" until you learn what it contains; if it is moist, then make a simple longitudinal incision along its length on this shape:.
Start the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~; if the moisture escapes, then cut open the case that contained it and sever all of it completely without leaving any remains, for often if something is left behind, it will return.
Then, apply a poultice of mustard in the raw wound if it appears, otherwise in salt water. Fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day, for it eats what remains of the flesh. Then make another poultice of mustard and third one if necessary.
Apply liniment on the wound until it heals, and if there is an abscess of pus, lance it in this manner:.
Apply a probe and press the forceps at both ends of the wound and apply your effort in extracting the pus that is contained within it, if it resists, make what I have described to you, and likewise do so in the abscess if it is hardened.
The treatment is as you have mentioned, and lancing an abscess that is hardened is easier because there is little blood and moisture involved, and some of these abscesses in the head may not have pus along with it, and this occurs when the abscess has been lanced on.
The abscess of an old woman's head is as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it cannot be broken even if struck with force, and the remaining abscesses occurring in the head are not like these abscesses that occur in children's heads.
When dealing with ulcers, they should all be incised gently and make an opening from beneath them to facilitate the flow of matter downwards, then treat it with a remedy that suits it.
The second and forty-fourth section.
In ulcers on dogs that commonly occur in the neck, these abscesses often occur in the neck and under the armpits and groin and they can occur all over the body. The one that occurs in the neck is one and many occur in different parts of the body and some of them are born from others.
Each dog has a specific cavity for its boil, as is the case with cattle and abscesses of the head as we have described, and there are many types of these boils, some of them hard and some that contain pus, and some of them are harmful and do not respond to treatment.
If it is in a good condition, when touched, it will move close to the skin color and can be moved in all directions without being fixed in the neck or jaw or glands or changeable. It is necessary to incise it gently from top to bottom of the body in this shape from one line (marked as 'j') to another line (marked as 'b').
Extract from all sides and dilate the skin holes with a probe or two probes, or multiple small ones if necessary as we mentioned in brain abscesses, and remove them little by little, so that it is not on a large artery or nerve. The instrument should not be too sharp.
Do not increase your cutting or mutilate the healthy, for you will cut what is not necessary to cut, if you cut an artery or vein and cause bleeding, sprinkle ground glass or some styptic herbs on the wound.
Close the wound and let the abscess settle, then open it and allow it to drain when it is ripe, so that the blood does not flow at this time, return to your work until you finish, then examine with your little finger if there remains any pus, then remove and clean the small cysts.
If there is a large artery in the cyst, it should not be cut from its root but rather tied with a strong and secure thread and left until it drops out harmlessly, then fill the wound with sterile cotton that has been soaked in the Egyptian balm, then treat it.
If the tendon is completely cut, it should be collected and sutured from its root after learning that no part of the tendon sheath remains. If you suspect that some part of the tendon sheath has remained, it should be left.
It is necessary to cut the tendon at its origin and end, then stitch it with what has been mentioned, and if any part of the tendon has moisture, press it with a simple plug where the break appears, and make the plug be on top.
Then, after the plug, use a surgical ligation with Egyptian cotton or similar for eating away any remaining damage until you see the wound is clean. Treat it with cauterizing irons for meat to stop the bleeding.
Chapter Thirty and Four.
In the fracture of the jawbone, a swelling occurs inside the socket.
The beginning of this fracture in the jawbone is not known to anyone in our country, but their words are as follows: those who practice slaughtering should avoid the fracture of the jawbone because they do not benefit from it.
To make all the fingers and thumb soft, for those who have a hot swelling in the mouth or socket or both eyes, if there is no illness in the cavity, it is necessary to use the fracture of the jawbone to escape from the pain that may be due to injury.
It is necessary, when we wish to perform this (operation), to split the bone below three or four small openings in the holes of the forceps, and the opening should be in the plane (or flat surface) and not in the concave (hollow or depression). This location is suitable for the opening.
As it is lean and has no fat or blood vessels, if the patient is a vein, it is necessary to stretch the skin with a band and then cut the skin until it reaches the bone, if he sees anything from it.
Then, the forceps described earlier are split and used to split the bone. It indicates the cutting of the bone by the blunt tool that comes out with what is cut and from the sound stop and leaving the wound open for a certain time if the fear of the break persists, the edges of the wound from the skin gather together.
And draw it straight (the bone) without concavity, then the medicine that softens the muscle is applied until it becomes supple, said this book, interpretation of this sentence in the speech we have heard is: If they see the cause (of the problem) has closed one of these passages they mentioned.
The ill one is doomed to die, and he himself orders that the wound be cut open. They went to the stone mortar so that the ill one exhales at the site of the wound and surrender from death. However, they only commanded leaving the wound open until the sickness chapter subsides and it becomes his third day, or thereabout.
When that happened, they commanded the wound to be sutured and treated until it healed, which I personally witnessed that the servant took the scissors and sent him to cut it, and he cut a part of the nose with it. Then I was called to treat it, but I found it rotting like a gnawed piece of meat, so I exposed the wound.
I found the blood that came out from the wound flowing easily, so I was certain that it had not been severed arteries or veins, and air was coming out from the wound. So I cauterized the wound and treated it until it healed, and he did not expose anything to the servant except a grunt in his voice, no more.
And after several days it returned to its best state, from here we say that the mortar does not pose a danger in it.
The Fourth and Fortieth Chapter.
In the mortar for the abscess that appears in the palate and is known as Philum of the Palate.
This is called the Filum Chalazaeum worm, it is a great tumor on the body color and it is common in women. It appears in two types.
Either it is a natural one, in which case there is no trick, or it is an acquired one, in which case it will be on either of two types. The first type resembles the pearl oyster shell and the second resemble a tumor from gout, but in its cavity (the tumor) danger lies. It is not advisable to treat it with iron needle unless it is small and has been softened and flattened with a hammer, for in this case it resembles the pearl oyster shell and is not attached to any nerves, so it can be broken as one breaks an oyster. Take it out along with the capsule in which it is if it is in a capsule, otherwise remove all of it, then treat the location as needed.
The Fifth and Fortieth Section.
In the cavity of pearl oysters (shells).
The varieties of pearl oysters are numerous and all their types have been mentioned in the sections. It is important to note here the difference between a pearl and its extraction, as it is a problematic matter. I say that the extraction will be accompanied by heat, swelling, and feared wounds until the oyster releases its pearl. The wound completes (heals) when the pus and suppuration occur, but it should not be accompanied by heat or pus or wounds. A scaphoid box-like container (should be used for it). It has a special vessel and should be placed on the color of the body. Its beginning is like that of a plaster and it becomes like butter, increasing and decreasing in size.
It is of two kinds, either it is pus-like or it contains moisture and the colors of moisture are numerous as mentioned in classification. In case you decide to treat a wound, it should be probed and drained first using an instrument called 'mads' according to its appearance in the following chapter.
The size of the bone abscess, then remove the instrument 'mads' and observe what comes out as a result of it. If pus comes out, its color may be any, in this case crush it gently according to what is mentioned for other abscesses. However, if no pus comes out after using the mads, then know that it is pus-like.
Crush it gently on this shape as you know, and sew it together with sutures and split the skin from all sides along with that and save it in a container if possible to extract it along with the wound.
If the keyhole is penetrated during surgery and it cannot be extracted correctly, it should frequently be extracted piece by piece until nothing remains of it. If something remains of it, whether little or much, repeated attempts should be made on the matter that requires it.
If the wound becomes infected and something remains of it, cauterize the wound with some sharp and hot substances to expel pus and treat it with all possible remedies until it heals. If the wound is severe, perform a surgical incision on it and treat it with whatever helps.
If a needle or something else pierces the artery and blood flows out, immediately cauterize the site with powdered alum and leave it for two to three days until the wound heals and stops bleeding. Then return to removing whatever remains of the foreign object.
Sixth and Forty-fourth section.
In the images of tools.
The images of the instruments that are used for cutting and breaking are three types: large, medium, and small.
Large instrument image:
Image caption: Middle finger.
Image caption: Small middle finger.
They are made of iron and steel with rounded edges to facilitate their entry into abscesses, and these are the images of lancets and are known as the lance; there are three types, large, medium, and small. Image caption: Large lancet.
Image caption: Medium lancet.
Image caption: Small lancet.
They are used for lancing abscesses, surgeries, wounds and abscesses in the bone and other things; they are made rounded and blunt like forceps made of brass or lead or copper or iron or silver. The best ones are made of lead.
Black lead can also be used to make drills. Nerves, which have swelling in their groove, are straightened with it. There are three types of them: long, medium, and short.
Each nerve groove requires its size and tightness, corresponding to the size and shape of the drill. Image of a large drill made from lead:
Image of a medium-sized drill made from lead:
Image of a tourniquet made of small lead:.
Images of various types of ligatures, which are numerous in kind, for one of them is simple with a single loop and belongs to the large, medium, and small categories; it includes ligatures made of animal intestines, of which there are three kinds, as well as ligatures with two loops, also having three kinds. It also includes curved ligatures with multiple loops. They are three kinds and among them is the ligature with three loops, which also has three types. All these types require each one for its specific use; Image of a simple large ligature:. Image of a simple medium-sized ligature:. Image of a simple small ligature:.
Image of a large intestinal ligature:. Image of a medium-sized intestinal ligature:.
Image of a small intestinal ligature:.
Image of a large ligature with loops:. Image of a medium-sized ligature with loops:. Image of a small ligature with loops:.
Image of a large ligature with three loops:.
Image of a medium-sized ligature with three loops:. Image of a small Scalpello (Scannarah) with three handles.
Image of a large forceps for crushing and cutting soft tissues and abscesses; there are three types of them, one is large, another is medium-sized, and the third is small. Large forceps image.
Image of a medium-sized forceps.
Image of a small forceps.
The pointed ends of its blades are limited, while the other sides are not, and this is done so that it can be used for cutting soft tissues without fear of cutting a vein or a nerve; with it, one can find some relief from the pain that occurs when abscesses are cut.
Image of a large probe. Three types of probes; one is large, another is medium-sized, and the third is small. Image of a large probe.
Made of half-mercury brass that can be heated, and on one side is a flat, shallow cup-like structure with a hidden curved blade inside resembling a bird's tongue that moves in and out as desired.
Images of probes that are inserted between the fingers in cases of abscesses not felt by the patient, and these have three types because one is large, one is medium, and one small. Image of a large probe:.
Images of amputations that cut off blood flow and they are three types because one of them is large, one is medium, and one is small, Image of the large amputation:.
They are made from copper or tin, turned into a short length as you see and attached to a handle, it is necessary that these types of amputations be large and small with you so that you can cut off the blood quickly in case of necessity and when no medicine is available.
But do not use it for cutting blood in every part of the body, and it is only used in the fatty parts such as the leg, foot, arm, thigh, chest, abdomen, and similar parts of the soft fatty organs.
And it can also be made into smaller tools resembling the shells of walnuts as seen in this image:.
It cuts blood if it leaks from a wound or when cutting veins or arteries, and it can be made into a handle as seen in this image:.
Chapter Seven and Forty.
In English: For ulcers on the male organ.
In English: A boil that resembles the female organ may swell in some people during sexual arousal to resemble the female organ, and it remains painful. For those who dislike this, it is necessary to treat the boil with leeches of this shape.
In English: From line A to line J:. In English: Then cut the pus out entirely, fill the wound with a healing ointment, then stitch up the wound with thread and treat it until it heals. If the testicle hangs low and is exposed like it would be for women.
In English: It is necessary to make incisions in the upper parts with leeches that resemble this shape, each one connecting to the other at their ends so that the larger one surrounds the smaller one on this pattern:. In English: From line A to line J, then cut the skin that is between the incisions and remove the pus, use the stitching, threads and anything else necessary for treatment until it heals.
In English: If you have not removed what is necessary, you should cut it off to prevent further damage or before bleeding occurs. It is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in rosewater and leave it until it absorbs all the pus, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-Four.
In abscesses that occur under the navel.
These abscesses that occur under the navel belong to the type of scrofula (khunazir) that has a hard casing and contains pus. If there is no pus in it, it should be lanced in this manner.
From point (b) to point (j), if all the contents of the abscess have been drained out during the incision, it should be covered with a cotton pad and left for another day then the cotton is removed.
Treat with a cautery that suits it until it blisters, if the abscess is of the kind of scrofula (khunazir) as we have mentioned earlier, then incise it in the manner we have mentioned for scrofula. If the wound has reached the point of suppuration, apply the kiyya as we have described before.
The Ninth and Fortieth Chapter.
In the Incision of the Abscess Which is Exposed Before the Anus or the Vulva and is called Anusarma.
If the Anus is wounded and the skin above it is also injured, then there is often an abscess in that place and similarly there may be an abscess caused by the Vulva and a boil as well.
The signs that indicate whether the abscess or boil is before the Anus or the Vulva are as follows: If the abscess is from the Anus, it will be flat and gathered in depth within the body, and when you press on it with your finger, it feels like a bladder.
If it is from the Vulva, the abscess will be elongated on the surface of the body, and incision on these abscesses is dangerous, especially in the armpits, neck, and in many parts of the body where it was very dangerous to treat with iron.
Also, if it is in the sides or on the head, it should be avoided as it was a swelling of the Anus, incision should be made in the skin lengthwise then open the incision with scissors, then cut the Anus and remove it from the pus.
Until it is opened, insert a probe into it and draw it to the opposite side and tighten the wound with thread in two places where you know to be the wounds in the veins that are in the armpits, then sew it up at the place between the stitches until all the blood comes out.
And the boil is drained, then treatment is applied to make it drop until the stitches fall off, then treated with a suitable cauterizing agent until healed.
If the boil is due to a wound in the vein, it should be grasped with your hand as much of the boil with the skin as possible, then insert a probe below the place you hold and draw it out and thread it with a thread until it comes out from the other side. Then tie the boil firmly with a strong suture as you have been instructed in tying the umbilical cord from both sides of the thread, for if you fear that the threads will slip, insert another probe with another thread under the entire boil where the first probe ends.
Tie the threads in four places and then cut open the boil in the middle until what is inside comes out, then cut off a piece of skin around it, leaving what was tied, then place ointment that has been soaked in oil on it. Then, use the treatment that is in the fat and marrow until it abrases (or scabs over).
The Fifth Chapter: Using treatments made of fat and marrow to help abrasions heal.
In the Worm that is exposed from the bone.
As a worm can be found in the ears and the intestines, it can also appear in bones, especially if there is an injury or some kind of fracture. This occurs more frequently in patients with osteomyelitis or fractures.
And in every place where a joint exists, there is a worm that resembles the color of the body and usually does not cause pain unless it is pressed forcefully, at which point it feels like a grape or raisin. The worm is not usually found deep within the body.
It is located under the skin and moves in all directions, not towards the front or the back. Therefore, if it is not found in the joints, it should not be treated with iron. It does not typically occur in the head or neck.
Make an incision in the skin, if the worm is small then grasp it with tweezers and remove it from its source. If it is large, tie it with a ligature, cut it, then extract it. Collect the wound using stitching and treat it until it abrases (or scabs over).
Chapter one, fifty-one.
In the section of cutting the intestines that are exposed in the abdomen.
The intestines which are exposed in some people's abdomens and other organs are known as the 'fetters.' They are thin at their origin but thick at their end, they may form small outgrowths and there can be large masses as well.
A man was observed with two intestines similar to fetters. Their origin was white and thin, their ends had split and were constantly oozing fluid. They were cut and weighed approximately eight ounces in one and about six ounces in the other.
When performing the operation, if it is found that the intestine is wet and the color of the intestines is white and thin at their origin, then they should be cut with a broad blade and placed in hot coals so that much blood will flow out when they are cut.
If you find that the intestine is dark, and it contracts when cut with iron, take a strong thread made of lead and tie the affected intestine with it for a few days, then increase the tightness of the lead thread, so that the intestine does not release.
Whenever a tumor emerges and falls off without consent, if the tumor is hard at its source, it is done with some fear and trepidation, especially if it is in the abdomen; however, it may be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
Then, it is cauterized to prevent its return, and it should be treated until the wound heals, but beware of cutting tumors that resemble flesh with slight sensation and are red or bluish in appearance; for they are cancerous and will be accompanied by a mention of cancer after this.
The Second and Fiftieth Section.
On the Treatment of Hernia.
Hernia may be caused by various factors, either from the rupture of the scrotum in the abdomen and its contents protrude out elsewhere or from blood that gushes out from veins or arteries; or from wind that accumulates inside.
If it is due to the rupture of the scrotum and protrusion of the contents, its color will resemble that of a tumor, be pale without pain, and show various positions. If it is due to the protrusion of the contents, its position will be different and if you press it with your fingers it will disappear, then return and there may be swelling and increase in size when touched by water or fatigue; if it is due to moisture, it will be pale.
If you press it with your hand and neither increases nor decreases, then if it was previously blood, these signs indicate that the tumor will turn black; if it was previously flesh, the tumor will be hard and fixed in one place.
If it was previously wind, pressing it makes it slippery; and in this case, one should observe whether the tumor is connected to blood vessels of veins or arteries. In such a situation, abstaining from treatment is necessary as there is fear and risk, as you know from the chapter where you discussed tumors caused by arteries and veins.
If the tumor is connected to a nerve or tendon, one should command the patient to stop and stand still for an extended period, then learn by palpation around the entire tumor. Then command him to lean back on your chest, then press around the tumor at the location you have learned by palpation, then push the center of the tumor up with a large spoon, and tie the pressing spot with a strong cord or thin wire.
The suture of the ligature shall be tight, then it shall be opened in the middle of the tied worm above the ligature. Your little finger shall enter it and seek the abscess, if found, the ligature shall be loosened and the abscess pushed inside the abdomen. If a pus is found, draw it out with a lancet.
Cut off the protruding portion, if the wound resists or bleeds, wrap it with a soft linen cloth and return to your work, take two strong threads and insert them into the incision made around the worm as ligatures, then pass the threads through the four points on the worm.
If you want to remove the ligature, leave it until the flesh tied is healed and falls off by itself or cut it if it is painful and heals, then treat it with what is necessary to make it heal completely, if there are any hidden worms in the flesh.
If there is pus in the worm, it should be cauterized as we have said and the blood or pus found inside it should be drained, then treat the place accordingly.
Third and fifth chapter.
On cancer treatment.
We have mentioned in the section of cutting, types of cancer and the way to treat it with medicines and the warning against treating it with iron, lest it burns, and we have mentioned cancer that originates in the uterus and the warning against its treatment.
We have mentioned at the beginning that when cancer is in a place where it can be entirely excised, such as cancer in the arm or leg and similar parts capable of being removed with all its mass, it is most certainly the case for small initial cancers. However, if it has grown large, it should not be approached.
Indeed, I have not been able to cure anyone from it nor have I seen anyone before me who reached that point, and the work is done on it if we are capable as previously mentioned, namely that it advances and makes the evil more bearable then it is eliminated if it is in veins filled with blood.
Then, the evil is settled in a place that allows for work to be done on it, then it meets with the venereal cancers which are treatable, and it is sealed from all sides with skin over it, until nothing remains of its roots, and leave the blood to flow and do not cut it quickly.
Pour out and thin all the blood from the site of incision with your hand or whatever tools you have at hand, for if it resists in operation, a large amount of blood will flow from cutting veins or arteries; so apply pressure to stop the bleeding until it stops, then treat as necessary until it heals.
Chapter Four and Fifty.
On the Treatment of Abscesses.
We have explained the classification of abscesses and how water accumulates, as well as signs for each type and treatment with medications; the one that is treated with iron is only the tough one and it should not be treated with iron the loose or meaty abscess types.
That is a fight, if you have treated this tough abscess type with medication and it did not heal, look to see if the cause has reached its end or if there is another disease other than the abscess such as weakness or some other illness.
Excise or incision and similar procedures, if you are treating it with iron, it is dangerous; if you see the cause and it is strong, there is no other illness in him except for the abscess and he is not a child or an old man, direct your work towards controlling the cause and standing between his hands. The attendant shall massage the abdomen with his hands and direct the water downwards to the side of the navel, then take a sharp forceps on this shape:
Take a probe long, narrow and slender, except for a slight curve at the tip to prevent its entry into the anus, then observe if pus is produced from the side of the navel.
Move the probe three fingers below and above the navel, if pus is produced due to liver disease, the probe should be easy to move from the navel by three fingers, but if it is due to kidney disease, the probe should be on the right side by three fingers.
Do not also place the probe in the side you intend to press on, so as not to exacerbate the inflammation at that weak location, then cut all the flesh with a lancet and insert the lancet into that location and lift your hand.
Hold the probe between skin and muscle as if you are drawing it, let the distance you draw be the thickness of a finger or so, then pierce the probe until it reaches an empty location, which is the location of the water, then remove it and insert the instrument into the hole.
It is similar to a catheter made of fine cane, which can be made from copper, brass or lead. On its lower end, it has a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes; two on one side and one on the other as you see.
One end of it is dipped in a stopper, similar to the inkwell tip on this image:.
On the upper end, it has a slot. When the instrument reaches water, the water will flow into the tool from its hourglass-like container. The water is emptied at a medium rate as you must not empty it more than what is necessary in time, for if you empty it excessively, there is a risk of the animal's life being endangered by suffocation.
Or he may expose it to death, but empty it according to its strength and what does not reveal the condition of the animal regarding its vitality and color, then the tool is withdrawn and the water is held back and this is because it holds water from its hourglass-like container.
Because of the skin that covers the hole in the needle which you pierced, then wait for a while if you think the animal is still alive for this reason.
Also from the mild heat, take out (something). Do this when you are observing and keep away from error until there remains from the water only the mild one. If you fear for the patient and leave something in the water greatly, treat it by burying it in hot sand.
Excessive bathing and sunbathing, enduring thirst, and treating it with dried medicines until it subsides. It is important to rest on the affected area (like a wound) and abdomen or kidneys after removing the water as described earlier.
Fifth and fiftieth section.
Treatment of children who are born with or have a narrow or misplaced urethra.
If some children are born with or have a narrow or misplaced urethra, it is necessary to try to make an opening for it within an hour of birth.
With a very thin needle on this picture:
Then, put a thin wire made of lead in the opening, tie it and hold it for three or four days until the child wishes to urinate. When it does so, remove the wire and replace it. If you do not make the wire from lead, there is a chance that the urine that flows over the area may not close up.
If a wound is narrow, it should be treated with a probe until it stretches out, and if one of them (wounds) is in an incorrect place, then that is because some of them are caused by childbirth and the wound is at the end of the abdomen; therefore, he cannot urinate towards it.
Until the probe is raised to above (the area) and he does not have a prolapse beforehand, it is impossible for the intestine to reach the womb in a stable state and this is a very bad cause; therefore, the probe should be drawn out on the surface.
Then move his abdomen with your left hand forcefully, and press the probe's tip with a scalpel or pointed reed that is similar to the size of a pencil so that it enters through the middle and the wound occurs in the middle as desired.
Keep blood loss in mind during your work, as it often occurs; therefore, be prepared with something that stops the bleeding and treat the wound until it is healed.
The Sixth Chapter and Fifty-Sixth.
On swellings found in the abdomen, vagina, anus, and genital area, as well as when the abdomen adheres to the vagina.
Often, this ulcer is encountered in the analysis and it is known as a Sana'a ulcer which is a kind of inflammation of flesh. It can be either bad or good. The one that is not bad should be attached to a delicate suture.
It is cut until it is cleaned completely, then a bandage soaked in Egyptian pounded herbs is placed on it and treated with pounded date later until it heals. As for when the ulcer is bad and has a putrid color, sulfur should be used after it has been cut and dried.
If the ulcer is in an open cavity but some of the ulcer is inside and some outside, it should be first removed from inside until it drains, then treated from the outside.
Because when you treat them together, the cavity is not safe from getting abscessed. Also, in both males and females, there can be a blackening and corruption, it is necessary to cauterize all that has become black or is corrupt.
Then honey is applied to it afterwards with ground almonds and coriander, followed by all treatment until it heals. If there is bleeding, sulfur is used in a crescent-shaped cup on this image:.
The catheter is beneficial for both conditions, namely bleeding and injury, if they deteriorate. If the bladder is eaten away and its sheath is lost in a suitable time, it is necessary to enter through the male passageway with a catheter made of lead to empty the urine. As for binding the bladder with a bandage.
This binding only happens in a case where the sheath is intact and there are no holes, but if it is injured or has a wound, it is necessary to drain it with a reed until the bandage dissolves and the bladder is cleared from all sides.
If the bladder and sheath are difficult to distinguish, it is necessary to drain something from both the bladder and the sheath. This is because the sheath is delicate, so it may be pierced quickly. Then, separate the sheath from the bladder with a thin wooden splinter that has been dipped in cold water so that it does not stick as well.
Then treat by drinking an astringent until it coagulates.
The Seventh and Fiftieth Chapter.
On the purification of infants and treatment for any errors they may encounter.
The holes are not something other than separating the connections, like all surgeries, except that it is for a purpose that we have done intentionally and used specifically in infants. Therefore, it is necessary to represent the best work in it.
The easiest path leads to safety, so I say that the initial stages have not been mentioned in any of their books because it was not used in their laws, but rather what we learned from it.
By experiment, I have found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use cleansing with musk and sandalwood, and they use fillets and ligatures with thread, and they make cuts with a knife and sew with sewing needles; and I have tried all these methods.
I have not found better than cleansing with sandalwood and ligature with thread because the cleansing with musk often irritates the skin as the skin of the groin is double-layered, so it may cut the upper layer while leaving the lower one.
I was forced to make the final cut and the pain did not subside, and cleansing with fillets has no guarantee of cutting the edge of the incision as it may enter the wound, and as for cleansing with a knife, it is likely that the skin will be torn or the skin of the child will be short by nature.
Often they give birth in this way and do not require cleansing, and as for cleansing with sandalwood and ligature with thread, experience has shown me its superiority because the sandalwood matches the incision since the blade on top is like the blade from below.
When your hand is suitable for surgery, cut it in one measure and at one time so that the stitching will be similar to a wall for the skin of the incision from all sides without the error of the buttock occurring, and the work should begin by first confusing the child.
If it is known that you only stitch in the incision and leave him for another day, then make him happy and secretive about it from every side so that you can do that with him and he will not understand it with his mind, then stop him between your hands on tiptoe.
Let him not sit nor hold the scalpel in his lap or under his foot so that the child's eye does not fall on the buttock or anything of the tools, then enter your hand into the incision and inflate the skin until the tip of the incision appears.
Then clean what gathers in it from the sores, then stitch the informed location with a double thread, then stitch below it slightly with a second thread, then hold on to your retractor and the needle holder at the lower stitch firmly and cut between the threads. Then quickly lift the skin and extract the root of the nail, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less painful for the nail infection. Then soften it with moist pincers, then sprinkle dry powdered burnt pumice stone on it, for it is best that I have tried or ground glass, for it is also good.
Then quickly lift the skin and extract the root of the nail, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less painful for the nail infection. Then soften it with moist pincers, then sprinkle dry powdered burnt pumice stone on it, for it is best that I have tried or ground glass, for it is also good. Then hold the nails from above with pincers, then press a cooked egg yolk dissolved in boiled milk and salted clarified butter on it, leave it there until the last day, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And this is a picture of the scraper that helps in cleansing:
A curette should be smooth with no curvature and the length of both blades should be equal to that of forceps, and as for the mistake often made in cleansing, it is likely that all or some of the inner skin will be removed during cutting; therefore, it is necessary to pull it back immediately using a probe before infection occurs.
Cut it in a straight line, if you are unable to hold it with your probe, then draw it out with a hook and cut it. If it takes three days and the area under the nail remains swollen and painful, leave it until the inflammation subsides and treat it.
Cut it according to what pleases you, and save from the root of the incision, for if something is cut from the root of the incision, there is no harm in that, treat it with what cures the wound from the types of herbs we described in the article on herbs.
If something is cut from the skin above the required amount and you pull it up, there is no harm in that either, for it is beneficial to do so, treat it with what we have mentioned until it heals.
The eighth and fiftieth chapter.
In the treatment of retained semen in the bladder.
Retained semen in the bladder occurs due to stone, blood clot, pus or meat like substance, and similar things. If it is treated with what we have mentioned for the types of treatments described in the section on urinary stones (Al-Taqassim), then there will be no harm.
If urine has not flowed and you suspect that it is retained due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be made to lie on his back. Then a man should sit on his abdomen and press his stomach to his chest and hold himself.
If the stone in the neck of the bladder cannot be pushed back with the methods we mentioned, and the condition worsens for the patient, then it is necessary to use an instrument called a catheter, which looks like this:.
Make it from gold and let it be thin and sharp, like the pen of a bird in a millet reed long in about the thickness of a finger. At its tip, put a soft cotton for attraction of urine. Tie it with two threads and at one end bind a wool or linen thread well.
Insert one end of the thread into the catheter and pull it back if anything comes out from the cotton, so that it enters the tube and seals it like a cork. Then anoint the catheter with oil or soap or white lead and place the patient on a couch.
Moisten the patient's anus and apply oil or warm water, then insert the catheter into the anus up to its root. Then inflate the anus above to the opening side, then push the catheter inside it.
Until the anus is inflated, then push the catheter inside until it approaches the stool. The man urinates and the catheter is in him, then push it to reach the bladder and the patient feels that he has emptied something empty.
This instrument is made in this grade because the channel that carries urine in it is crooked, then the thread is pulled through it with some force, hence the urine follows the thread, then it is drawn out and the urine strains, and the catheter returns.
Continue doing that until the bladder empties and the discomfort subsides, [or] until the patient no longer experiences pain.
The ninth and fiftieth section.
How to catheterize the bladder.
The following images show the tools that are suitable for catheterization, they are made of copper or tin with a long tube attached to a narrow neck meant to hold water and medication within it. This tool is called a catheter, and here are its images:.
Made of copper or tin with a long tube attached to a narrow neck, all but one end is curved so that it can be inserted into the body through three holes, two on one side and one on the other as you see.
The hollow space inside the handle is designed to hold just enough liquid to attract something moist, and if you suck on it, it will draw in moisture, and when you expel it, it releases the moisture up to a distance suitable for producing a whistle sound in naval battles.
If you want to expel the humors from the bladder, insert the tip of the cannula into the humor and draw it upwards. The humor will be drawn into the depths of the cannula then its tip will enter the urethra according to what we have described in the stories, then push the humor out with the cannula.
That humor reaches the bladder and is felt by the patient. Here is a gentle way to catheterize the bladder: (picture of a gentle method for catheterization)
A catheter is made of silver or lead, its upper end resembles a small ball, and underneath it there is a loop where the string goes. Then take a clean bladder bag and place in it the fluid that you want to catheterize the bladder with. Tie the catheter securely between the loops with strong cotton thread.
Heat the fluid slightly over a fire, then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra and push it strongly but gently until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder bag, make a small ball of cloth, puncture it from all sides, insert the cotton thread through the holes as it rotates, then gather the ball like a sack after placing in it the fluids and debris.
Then tie it in the instrument and work with it as you would work on a bladder from your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Then sew it up in the instrument, and work on it like you would work on the bladder using your own hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
In the extraction of the stone (bladder stone).
We have previously mentioned in the section the types of bladder stones and their treatment with medications, and we explained the difference between the bladder stone that originates in the kidney and the one that originates in the bladder, and all the signs of this, and we also mentioned that surgery is performed on the bladder stone.
The bladder stone, specifically the one that originates in the bladder, appears in the lower abdomen and I shall describe it in detail and briefly.
I say that the bladder stone originating in the bladder is more prone to infections and among its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder resembling water in color.
And it appears as gravel, and he mentions its presence and spreading, and in most cases it is accompanied by itching, and often it worsens until it reaches fourteen years, and it becomes difficult for the elderly, but among the young people, it is average between this.
The larger the stone, the easier its treatment; the smaller ones, on the contrary, require more effort. When approaching the treatment, it is first necessary to aspirate the area with a syringe that draws out all the pus that may be present in the vicinity, as it may prevent the detection of the stone during examination.
Then, take the syringe and push it downwards to make the stone descend into the bladder or ascend from a higher position several times, then rest it between your hands with its head under your foot and its body in your hand to make the bladder empty completely, then examine it.
Examine it externally, if you sense a stone in the cavity, move quickly to pierce it. If it does not sink, press the forceps to hold the bladder and pierce it with the sharp finger of the left hand or with the middle finger.
If a boy is mature, enter it into his buttock and examine for the stone until it is found beneath one of your fingers. Then gently move it little by little towards the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it out in the desired direction.
Command the servant to press on the bladder with his hand and command another servant to move his left hand towards the area above and his right hand to push the skin that is beneath the testicles, from an angle away from the location of the opening, then grab the forceps depicted here:.
Dig between the buttocks and testicles but not in the center, rather towards the left side of the penis. The opening should be on the same stone, and you press with your finger in the buttock to push it out obliquely so that the opening is wide outside and narrow within to facilitate the passage of the stone.
Do not exert too much pressure with the finger that is in the buttock on the stone during the opening, for it may come out easily without strain. Also be aware that some stones have angles and letters which can make their extraction difficult.
From it (the surgery), there is an extraction resembling a bladder stone, which is easily removed. If it has no angles or letters, increase the incision slightly. If it does not come out this way, it should be compressed on it firmly with a flat and hard instrument similar to a pestle.
To compress on the stone so that it does not slip away, or to enter from below it with a soft delicate instrument with a pointed tip, if it is not possible to do so on it, increase the incision slightly. If something of blood gushes out, cut it with scissors.
If there are more than one, push the larger one towards the mouth of the bladder first, then make an incision on it. Then push the smaller ones after that and do the same if there are more than two. If it is very large, know that it is not advisable to make a large incision on it because it may expose one of its parts to danger.
Either it dies or it develops permanent urinary retention because it cannot be removed from the bladder without risk of rupture, so try to push it out until it comes out or breaks it with forceps until it is broken and comes out in pieces.
If your work is completed, let the incision be sealed with candle wax or oil and wait for it to harden. Then pierce it with a lancet, apply hot water or warm oil and bandage it. Do not unwrap the bandages until the third day.
If the wound becomes swollen with excessive water and oil, treat it with alum and alum-like substances until it shrinks. If pus or a hot infection appears in the incision, similar to blood accumulating in the bladder and not being urinated out, this can be recognized by the presence of blood with urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will cause damage to the bladder and its collapse. Then wash the incision with vinegar, water, and salt of every kind until it heals.
It is recommended during all treatments to tie the veins and bring them together to secure the medicine placed on the site. If the stone is small and lodged in the ureter, causing it to narrow and not allowing urine to pass, treat it as I have previously described before it becomes obstructed.
"I have often used this remedy for the fracture, and I have found that it consists of taking a splint made of steel iron, which appears like this:
"The splint is a sharp wedge-shaped piece, then take some string and tie it to the splint under the fracture so it does not return to the joint, then insert the steel rod into the fracture until the splint reaches the same level as the fracture.
"Hold the splint in the same fracture and press gently until it is completely inserted, then you will feel pain, but do not stop pressing until it exits from the other side because the bone marrow will flow out from its pore and your hand should be on what remains of the fracture outside the splint when it cracks and comes out with the marrow, and the fracture heals.
"If this remedy does not suit your case, tie a string under the fracture and another one above the fracture, then break the fracture in the same splint between the strings, then remove it.
"Then untie the string and clean the clotted blood that has formed in the wound, it is necessary to tie the string under the fracture so it does not return to the joint and the other string from above so that when the string unties after the fracture exits, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, if you tie the upper thread, raise the skin above it so that it returns to its place and covers the wound as we have mentioned.
The first and seventh section.
On the extraction of stones in women.
Little stones are seldom found in women, so if one is found in a woman, it makes her treatment difficult and prevents many from allowing their wives to be examined by a physician. One may say that the woman was recently married and the other that she will not allow herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is a virgin or from the uncircumcised, and the third is that you will not find a woman skilled in this art, and fourthly, the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from its location, so you need a different incision.
And in this matter there is a risk, so if necessity requires it, then one must take a female physician who is skilled and if she is not available, seek an experienced virgin or bring a woman who is capable in matters concerning women or a woman knowledgeable in this art through indication.
Bring her and order her to examine the stone first, which means she should look if the woman is a virgin by inserting her finger into her vagina and examining the stone. If she finds it and presses it under her finger.
"When this (bone) is to be shattered, if it is not curved and is thick, they command that a finger be inserted into the socket of the elbow and feel around on the fragment after placing the left hand on the humerus and rotating it well.
"When found, it is necessary to slide it down from the mouth of the socket towards below its length until it ends at the bone's base then shatter it where half of the elbow meets the bone from any side it approaches from and feel for the fragment in that direction.
"Use a finger to press the fragment held underneath, and make the shatter small first then insert a probe into the small shatter. If you feel for the fragment, increase the shatter as much as you know the fragment is coming out. Know that there are many types of fractures.
"They are small and large, simple and compound, short and long, straight or curved, with a shaft or without. Know their types to direct your action accordingly. If bleeding overwhelms you, dab the powdered cautery in the affected area and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops then return to your work.
Until the stone is expelled, prepare to extract it with the instruments mentioned in the male's stone extraction, so that you may benefit from them in your procedure. If you are overwhelmed by bleeding and realize that it is arterial bleeding, stop at the location.
Hold it firmly with a firm, strong grip and leave it without attempting again, and do not extract the stone or expel it. Perhaps the person may recover. After days have passed and the bleeding site has healed, return to your procedure until the stone is expelled.
The Second and Sixth Section.
In the fissure on the water pipe.
The water pipe is a gathering of moisture within the white scrotum that lies beneath the thickened capsule surrounding the testicle and is known as the scrotal sac, which may have a special covering provided by nature in one part of the scrotum.
Until it is thought to be another testicle and it lies between the scrotum and the white scrotal sac we mentioned, but this does not occur except in hermaphrodites; this hernia contains a substance that may expose females to harm upon impact.
This pus is of various colors, either yellowish or bloody red, or dark brown, or watery white and it often occurs with the signs that are recognized.
If the water collects, then if it is in a white blister as we have mentioned, the abscess will be short and resemble a small ball and the character of it will not appear because the pus surrounds it from all sides.
If the pus is in a bladder-like covering, then the abscess will be elongated in one direction of the ball.
And for this reason, a person is deceived that it is another bladder, and if the pus is between the skin and the white blister, then it occurs under the skin. As for if you want to know the color of the pus, squeeze the abscess with a hot lancet which you have previously drawn its image, whatever comes out after the lancet gives a judgement about what is inside.
If we go to treatment with iron, then it is necessary for the patient to be commanded to lean forward if possible and you look at his body in a relaxed state, then he places something slightly above him and put multiple drills under it, then you sit on its left side.
The servant is ordered to make the patient sit on his right side, he should direct him towards the shin bone and the flank of the abdomen. Then he should grasp a broad lancet and cut the skin of the shin from the center towards the edge near the anus.
The cut should be made in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the shin bone into two, until it reaches the white scrotum, then he should make an incision and take care not to cut further. The lancet used for this purpose should be taken from the side which adheres more closely to the testicle, and the incision should be made as deep as possible.
Then fill the scrotum with water and widen it as much as possible and let all the water out, then separate the edges of the cut with dividers and lift the scrotum away from the shin bone without touching its skin and cut the scrotum as deep as possible, either in one piece or in several pieces.
It is important that the surrounding area is not touched, because if you do not cut it, the water will not escape. If the testicle protrudes from its skin during the procedure, once you have finished cutting the scrotum, return it and then sew together the edges of the shin bone skin with stitches.
Then treat the other surgeries until it heals, if the egg is rotten due to another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are in the connection of fear of rupture, then cut the incision and extract the egg, then treat it as we have mentioned.
If the water has collected in both openings, know that it is double rupture, pierce the other opening on whatever was done in the first one, whether it be equal or not, and if you believe that the work is one, do it, then smear with blood.
Enter the ruptures with threads which you have dipped in oil or tallow, and let another thread come out which you have dipped in alcohol and vinegar, spread it over the incisions and the abdominal cavity, and place over the openings swabs soaked in wax, these are the bandages. Tie them from above with a ligature that has six sides on this figure:
Then take two swabs, tie and secure them with a thread that is loose on this model, and make the sides that are knotted from cotton or wet thread and collect them in the suturing strap, and one side is taken to the seat towards the back.
The second one takes hold around the anus and both sides on the buttocks from below, and the remaining parts on the thighs, and gather all the strength in a strap of sinew. This tool can also be made with cord instead of leather strips made of iron.
Take a sharp scalpel blade and cut the skin of the anus, it will be held together until the white scrotum containing water is exposed. Then apply another scalpel on this image:.
It is similar to a Greek eye, then it will be tied with it until all the moisture comes out. Then the scrotum will be pulled with tweezers and cut with a scalpel along the membrane and separate it as much as possible, ensuring that all of it is excised and keep the bladder away from fire.
Know that this procedure is clean and far from bleeding, and better than cutting with a knife. If you oppose the knife or if it is hot or bleeding or anything else, it is necessary to treat whatever opposes this with treatment that suits it according to what you present.
If the reason for the operation is a bladder and he cannot endure this work due to his skill, do not use the cautery on what I describe as such, if it is healthy according to your judgment based on our evidence.
The bladder stone should be treated by having the patient sit on a raised chair, then cauterize the worm in its lower part with a broad needle and make the cautery long enough to match the body length and the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out. Then place some woolen material on the location and tie it.
Leave him to pass more water then treat him until the wound heals, for if the passage of water is delayed during cauterization, it may be because the white dressing is causing an obstruction in the mouth of the wound and preventing the water from flowing out.
When this occurs, it is necessary to insert a reed or the instrument that extracts the urine of the cyst which we have previously described or slightly enlarge the opening of the wound.
Know that urine may return and accumulate after six months or so, if it does accumulate, cauterize it again in the same way and have the patient rest for a few days.
Third and Sixth Chapter.
In the Incision on the Tendon of Muscle and its Treatment.
Know that incision on this tendon is likely to lead to inflammation in most cases, hence it is left alone and safety prevails over it. However, I am reminding the work in it and its types of inflammation.
I say that inflammation occurs frequently in bodies that have an accumulation of anthrax, and this may be due to various reasons such as excessive heat causing the formation of anthrax or by a blow. The color of the inflammation is similar to the body color and it does not contain water.
The inflammation is swollen and sometimes the inflammation may be hard, its color is red and it has no sensation. It may originate from boils or from inflammation of the lymph nodes, which is known as aggravation of the inflammation.
If you squeeze it with your fingers and it should not be exposed to the bite, and as for the one that originates from inflammation of the lymph nodes, nothing aggravates it when squeezed with the fingers. This type may be incised and cut on other muscles.
It means: "Pierce the skin of the tumor (Khaisa), then push the bead upwards and extract it from the white incision, cut away the knot from the vessels, tie the vessels together, and cut the knot after it has been separated from all sides of the bead. If the bead is found to have hardened with that fleshy tissue.
"It is necessary to extract and cut the bead, and if there is adhesion between any part of the skin or among the vessels, it is necessary to remove all that adhesion and cut it completely.
"If the tumor is a growth of flesh in the place of adhesion, it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the bead as previously mentioned. If you have carried out your procedure and caused bleeding from the cauterized veins in the neck, use oil and wine to stop the bleeding, then treat the wound with other remedies until it heals.
"The Fourth and Sixth Chapters
"In the treatment of fistulas associated with ulceration.
"Ulceration is a boil caused by some infection, similar to abscesses, accompanied by swelling of the anoints, making it difficult for movement and exercise, and in the treatment of this condition, lancing (making a small incision) should be done closely, as mentioned earlier.
It is necessary to mention the work in it concerning what the early practitioners have done, so I say that it is necessary for the patient to sit on a raised chair, then lower the testicles and grasp the scrotum skin with your fingers along with the forceps which are close to the scrotum.
The assistant should hold it and pull it forcefully then you shall pierce it with a thin, sharp probe made of the same material as the forceps until the scrotum is exposed. Then you shall cut from all sides as I have described to you in the chapter on castration that is in the urethra. Then you shall thread an arrow through it and sew it up with a fine cord.
You shall tie it in the first locations where it was exposed, and also at the end, then you shall pierce it in the middle lengthwise, making a hole long enough to expel whatever pus has gathered there.
Then treat the hernia by treating all other surgeries which one desires to occur in it, so that they have a duration for the excretion of the ovum which nourishes one of the ovaries. If you expose the ovary along with the ovum, there will be no risk of sterility of the egg. Before cutting the oviduct, it should be ligated and not used.
The fifth and sixth sections.
In the treatment of malignant aneurysms.
This aneurysm occurs from a rupture that exposes in the extended sac on the abdomen near the armpits, from where the aneurysm migrates to one of the ovaries.
This sac may occur from a rupture, or from an extension and this type can happen for various reasons such as hitting, pressing, pulling, lifting heavy objects, and similar causes. Its symptoms are that it may occur slightly over a long period if it is due to an extension of the sac.
A boil does not occur, and the abscess is at about the same level as the puncture before the lancet has been pressed; a sign of this is if it happens from the edge of the lancet that it occurs first with a strong pain and the abscess will be different in appearance beneath the skin closely.
The abscess exits and goes out from the lancet, and it may exit with pus which is called this type of abscess and pus-discharge, and it may be accompanied by a smell; it can occur that there is mucus in the abscess and it gets blocked, thus there will also be necrosis present.
Because it occurs with a strong pain and throbbing, which is not easy to bear; the treatment for these kinds of abscesses with iron carries risk, so one must be careful not to cause it; the method of treatment is to instruct the patient to press the abscess into his own wound if he comes back.
Then, he lies on his back between your hands and raises the affected limb; then you stretch the skin above the abscess upwards and break the whole skin over it; then you make incisions in the broken skin with scissors as much as is necessary to open the abscess.
The ulcer should be as large as it can be to extract the egg, then the forceps beneath the skin are broken until the white hard scurf is exposed from all sides. Then, your thumb is inserted into what follows the egg.
Between the white hard scurf under the egg and the second scurf, and with the instrument that is behind the egg, stretch your left hand inside the skin. Meanwhile, push the white hard scurf to the top of your right hand and raise the egg along with the scurf towards the ulcer side.
The attendant commands to move the egg upward and you release the instrument that is behind it, then search with your thumb carefully so as not to find anything from the sticky matter in the white hard scurf. If you find something, push it towards the abdomen downward.
Then take a cord in which there is a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and insert it near the last scurf that is beneath the skin towards the ulcer side, then cut the sides of the thread until it becomes four threads. Then, it is to be connected together in a structure and the scurf that we mentioned as being beneath the skin is tied with a strong knot from two sides, then the sides of the threads are also tied with a strong knot so that nothing from the exudates that nourish them can reach it. If there is a boil that becomes hot and swells, and another rope-like thing also appears outside the first one, farther away from it than the length of two fingers, after these two ropes, discharge comes out from beneath the scab on the skin equal to the size of a bone in the finger.
If there is a boil that becomes hot and swells, and another rope-like thing also appears outside the first one, farther away from it than the length of two fingers, after these two ropes, discharge comes out from beneath the scab on the skin equal to the size of a bone in the finger. Cut everything completely in rotation and remove the pus along with it, then poke a hole below the scab of the boil to let blood and pus out as described earlier, then use cotton soaked in oil and place it in the wound, and use the rope that was previously described.
The white scab that we mentioned after cutting may be cauterized to prevent bleeding, but it is seldom necessary to do so. Leave the rope until it falls off by itself; if it sticks, press on it with hot water and hold something that absorbs heat on top of it until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with all the treatments for wounds until it heals.
The Sixth and Seventh Sections.
In the case of an abscess caused by wind, no one has ever tried to treat it with iron. However, we have previously explained how to make a cataplasm to apply to the affected area after making a small incision in it, and this is to bind the poultice below.
Then, make an incision in the middle and treat the abscess by opening it until the pus drops out and treat the wound as previously mentioned until it heals.
The seventh and eighth sections.
In the vein which is in the right forearm.
In case the vein in the right forearm is exposed, as previously mentioned, nothing from the left side should be applied to it, and if something were to happen (i.e., if a mistake occurs), it would be easy to correct at any time.
But if the time is prolonged, the incision in the artery (i.e., the vein) will extend until the blood and pus appear in the wound, which will expose that part of the artery that is in the right forearm as previously mentioned. This is because the artery (i.e., the vein) extends, then it contracts and becomes hardened, and it stops flowing. The treatment for this is as previously described.
It can be treated with iron in this way: place the affected area on a flat surface between your hands, then make an incision in the exposed vein for about three finger widths, and tie the arteries beneath the skin.
Until the white artery (vein) that follows it is exposed, take a suture and place it on the affected part of the vein, then compress it to the depth of the abdomen, tie the two affected areas on both sides of the suture with stitches, and sew them together.
Then, you should cauterize the side of the wound and neither cut the cartilage nor press the boil or anything else as you have learned in treating a gnawing ulcer. Then treat it like a surgical wound.
If the threads are cut, clean them and tighten the wound until it heals. Know that cartilage will shrink and not increase in size.
The best option in this case is because it is closest to safety.
The eighth and ninth section.
On the incision of a scarred skin.
Many people experience scarring of the skin in some cases, but not limited to the skin itself, as there is meat inside which can cause disfigurement. Therefore, anyone who wants to treat it should find out what causes it on its surface.
Cut all the scarred skin and join the two edges together, if you prefer to stitch it first, sew the thickened skin with three or four threads and pierce through them, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it like other surgical wounds until the wound heals and the stitches fall out.
The ninth and tenth section.
In Al-Ikhsas (Suture).
In our law, suturing is forbidden.
This was to be avoided in my book, and it is only mentioned for two reasons: the first reason being that a physician should know its treatment if asked about it; the second reason being that we often need to use sutures on animals for our benefit.
The animals to which sutures are applied include dogs, cats and similar animals, so I say that suturing should be done with two types of stitches: one type is performed by tying knots with a heated instrument, and the other type is performed by using scissors and cutting.
Then, press it with your hand until it hardens and does not show when touched; as for suturing by cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and pull back its skin with the left hand, then tie the ligatures and sew each knot separately.
Leave a gap between the two sutures so that they do not stick together, and do not leave any thread on them except for the thin needle which is used for the stitches; this type of suture is better than the one performed by tying knots.
Since pus may remain in the female, animals gather around it, then the wound is treated until it discharges.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of women.
In the treatment of hernia, it can be found in men on two types: either it appears above the abdominal wall or within the scrotum between the testicles, resembling a woman's vagina with hair and may cause urinary leakage from the one located within the scrotum.
And as for women, it has one type: it is above the vagina like small water bladders that come out from outside resembling a man's penis and its two parts like female genitals, and the treatment of the three types.
The type in men is to cut the excessive flesh until its effect subsides, then treat it like other surgeries until it discharges. As for the second type in men that causes urinary leakage from the scrotum, there should be no treatment and no probing of the bladder.
Chapter 1 and 70.
On the removal of cysts and excessive flesh from women's vaginas.
The boil may increase its power over natural order until it becomes putrid and emits a foul smell. In some women, it can swell to the size of a male's. It may spread widely.
It is necessary to seize the boil with your hand or a pincer and cut it, refraining from cutting too deep so as not to expose blood flow.
Then treat it with surgical treatments until it drains, and as for the pus, it is meat that has grown in the womb until it fills it.
It may also come out to the outside like pus. And for this reason, it is called a purulent disease; it should be cut like a boil and treated until it drains.
The Second Chapter: Seventy.
On the Treatment of Abscesses.
Abscess is a cavity in a woman that is not pierced or if it is pierced, it is small. It may be natural, born with it, or acquired, which is due to an illness that has progressed. The acquired one may consist of pus that has grown excessively.
The lancet may be thin or thick and it can be either in the depth of the uterus, its sides, above or below, and it prevents gathering (clotting), tying, childbirth and possibly abortion, and knowing this is by observation of susceptibility.
If the cut is superficial, it should not be probed with fingers or needles. If the incision is thin and close to the edges, then make an indentation on the edges. Then place your thumb and fingers from both hands onto it.
The woman lies on her back, exposing her belly. Then the incision is made forcefully until the thin lancet is cut and the incision is opened. Then she takes a piece of thread soaked in oil and places it on the spot. The woman should gather (the area) every day to prevent the spot from being touched again.
If the lancet is thick and large, it should be cut with a broad, flat instrument that resembles paper, then if the incision is of meat, tie it with sutures and cut it off. Keep medications with you to prevent discharge other than pus, such as quinces, sheep's milk, and vinegar mixed with white egg.
Then use a catgut (intestine from a sheep or goat) that is wide enough so as not to cause quick coagulation of the wound, hold it for several days and then apply beech-tree resin (pitch). Treat with other treatments for inflammation until healed. If there is growth of flesh from another body part in the womb, it should be cut at this feature.
If it is not a cancerous tumor, the tumor that occurs in the womb does not respond to iron cauterization.
The Third and Seventieth Chapter.
On the treatment of fistulas, hemorrhoids and red ulcers that occur in women's vaginas.
As for fistulas, it is an enlargement of the openings of veins so that blood flows constantly from them. If a fistula occurs, it becomes hemorrhoids. I have mentioned its types and their symptoms earlier. Here I will explain further.
There is no treatment for them and there is no treatment that can cure them, so I say that if fistulas and hemorrhoids are deep within the womb and cannot be felt, they should not be treated with iron. If they occur in the mouth of the womb and can be felt, it is the one that should be treated.
A woman must enter a cold house, then insert the probes either by discussion or with a blunt force. She should cut it from its root when blood flows out of one of the constricting vessels for blood not from the veins.
Like the gall bladder, spleen and liver, then lift her legs to the wall, then she should be placed in cold water if bleeding continues, she should sit on a dish of hot stones and hot ashes, then take barley flour, knead it with honey and vinegar.
Press it against her abdomen, if the bleeding stops or not, then tighten the iron rods and belts without constraint, then take a cloth and immerse it in the decoction of poppy seeds or milk thistle or common mallow root with ashes drink, and insist on position.
If the worm abates, treat the position with mercury until it disappears. As for the red pus, it resembles the heads of lice, so it should be cut according to what has been described in the probes and treated until it disappears.
Chapter Four and Forty-Seven.
In the case of an inguinal hernia that protrudes into the abdomen.
Types of abscesses, such as cancer, abscesses that become hardened, ulcers, boils, carbuncles, scrofula, eczema, furuncles, fissures, and hot sores are all found in the womb (abdomen). I have explained each of these diseases and their symptoms in the classification.
It is important to mention in this article the hot sore that appears in the abdomen if it is one of the abscesses that accumulate for a long time and become iron-hard, it is necessary to look carefully, if the sore of the abscess is at its beginning sharp with blows and inflammation.
You see it red if you feel its touch, do not hurry with the treatment and treat it according to what cures inflammation until these symptoms subside, then it is necessary for the woman to sit on a chair that has two seats and lean on her back.
She should gather her legs towards the lower abdomen and be barefoot, her arms should be under her buttocks, and her hands should be tied together with a bandage that is suitable.
Therefore, the patient should sit on the right side, and the instrument that opens the womb (forceps) which appears after, should be used. It is advisable that if you wish to use this instrument, the depth of the woman's womb should be estimated so as not for anything from the instrument to exceed the depth of the womb.
The patient must be prepared and the instrument (forceps) must not exceed the depth of the womb, if it does so, a cotton swab should be placed on the top of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the uterus. The tip of the forceps should be placed at the upper side.
Hold the instrument and have your assistant direct the tip of the forceps until it reaches the cervix. When the opening appears, touch it with your hand and if it is soft, squeeze it firmly at its base for as long as necessary.
It is necessary that in the incision, it becomes a liniment of white, greased in oil or green ointment containing some binding agent. The liniment should come out from the wound at the neck of the bladder and it should be on the bladder and on the surrounding area. Clean wool soaked in water boiled by tailors should be applied to it.
Then, after two days, treat with the mercury which is suitable for that until it heals completely.
Wash the bladder and wound with water and vinegar, then with water boiled with the root of asafetida or long ginger. Then return to the mercury, for if the discharge is excessive inside the bladder.
It is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat as previously mentioned in the section.
The fifth and seventy chapter.
On the teaching of how to treat living worms that emerge in an abnormal shape.
It is necessary for midwives to first recognize the natural shape of childbirth, and among its signs if a woman feels a strong urge to go down and breathe heavily, and there is a bulge where she has no bulge normally.
The birth will occur quickly, so know that this delivery will be natural in shape and the birth will take place on the head and the afterbirth either with it or detached from it. If you see these signs, it is necessary to squeeze the abdomen so that the child is born quickly.
If it descends onto the head, the afterbirth will descend with it and will be properly cleaned, and if this delivery occurs, it is not a natural one because the child may be born with its feet first and its hands before its head.
One hand or one foot may be born, or the head and a hand or it may emerge sideways and bend on its back or something similar to these abnormal shapes. It is necessary for those who are capable to be very careful with all of these things and avoid error.
I explain each of these shapes and how to handle them in order to guide you in this matter, if the child is born with its head, then this is a natural birth and it causes pain for the woman and labor pains become difficult for her, and if you see her strength has weakened, have her sit on a chair and instruct the women to hold her.
And [the procedure for] softening the womb with cooked hartshorn and moist poultices, then inserting the prepared fingers between them gently to break the membrane or to open it by force until the moisture within it is drained and the woman's abdomen is made to ripen until the fetus descends.
If the fetus does not descend, it is necessary to make the woman labor by applying hartshorn plaster with oil of ambergris. Then she should be ordered to strain and contract her abdomen using bellows and hold her mouth and nose until the fetus is expelled. The fetus will come out first through the hands. If this happens, it is necessary to gently guide them back into place.
If the woman does not go into labor, she should be placed on a birthing stool with her legs elevated above the ground and then the stool is shaken so that the woman does not fall off. If her hands do not enter and the fetus dies, they must be cut off and the remaining fetus retrieved.
Or tie the hands with ropes and pull them, as the fetus will come out. The fetus comes out on the legs. If the fetus comes out on the legs, it is necessary to push it upwards gently until it is straightened, then take one of the legs and gently guide it along.
If it comes out into the fingers, order her to wash and anoint it with alum, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we have described, and the fetus is slightly expelled bit by bit until it becomes in its natural shape, it will come out smoothly when that happens. In this case, prevent everything we have described.
A fracture of the finger or thumb, a burn on the shin and anointing with oil should be treated by dissolving camphor and striking all around it forcefully. Then put her on her back and lower her abdomen. After that, let her sit in warm water until the pain subsides.
If you suspect that the fetus is lying bottom-up, make a small incision near its navel and let it heal. When the incision heals, hold the mother on a chair, then press and compress it. Close both her nostrils, pinch her nose shut and make an incision in her lower abdomen with a sharp instrument. This will cause the fetus to be expelled from her within an hour. The expulsion of the fetus will occur through its back and legs.
If it is in this position, insert your fingers gently and gradually. The woman will then squat and pull her legs apart while she lies down on a bed, with her hands resting on the ground. Then, make a small incision on her abdomen. Then, remove the amniotic sac from her legs until it is located at the bottom. If the fetus does not come out, grasp both of her legs and move them forcefully. Make a small incision above the pubic bone only enough for the fetus to ascend. Then, the one who is skilled should enter with their hand and gently manipulate the fetus.
The woman must expel the fetus, and its exit may be difficult due to resistance. If you cannot grab it, make the woman sit up straight and walk. If she cannot walk, she should rest.
Massage the patient's abdomen and shake her sides violently, then apply the leech described in the games if it can be obtained. Place it on a chair, treat her in the hand and set the fetus back to its natural shape. Apply pressure to the woman and order her to bear down until it comes out.
The delivery of the child face up, with his head towards the mother's chest. It is recommended that those who are capable grasp the child's head and slowly turn it, while adjusting its position when necessary. When it aligns, hold it with the ointment and games we described earlier.
After making the woman move slightly, if she does so, place her on a chair and order her to lean towards the right side. Then make her bear down and apply pressure with your fingers; the child will be born in breech position.
If the water breaks from the uterus in this manner and there is mucus, tear the mucus with your fingernail until it stops flowing, grasp the face of the child and its neck. Cut the nuchal cord without causing strangulation so that the child does not choke and die. Then push the child inside until it is in the correct position.
A woman must leech herself several times, for it is easy to evacuate, many boils or pimples will come out. Know that boils frequently produce offspring; they may produce three or four, but this usually happens in the abscess. As for five, it is something unnatural and the embryos do not live.
Encircle them and if they multiply, let it be with a single blister. They will split with a sharp probe between them, each one being enclosed in its own sheath, and just as a baby is naturally born easily, so too will the boils emerge in a natural way, though their emergence may be painful as described earlier.
If some of them are difficult to deliver and they become what we have described as unnatural forms, treat them as we have described earlier, so that they may be gentle and do what they can with skill and convert into any shape suitable for healing, leading to safety.
Mentioned is what can be found in the womb as boils that fall down; they may form singly, in pairs, trios, quartets, quintuplets, sextuplets and more than ten. I have heard of a woman who passed seven and another who passed fifteen, all of them being boil-like structures.
Esteemed and knowledgeable [person], this should all be in the science of cauterization, as there may be such incidents one day which require what is appropriate for it.
The sixth and seventieth chapter.
On the extraction of the stillborn child.
If you treat the stillborn child as described in the section on treatment, but it does not come out and the situation requires manual intervention, then if the woman is healthy and has no symptoms that could cause harm to her, she should lie down on her back.
The head should be situated lower, the neck elevated twice and its keeper adjusts it from either side or ties it to the bed so that the body does not draw it upon completion of the pregnancy.
Then, the mouth of her womb is turned with moist cotton swabs, with forceps and a canula, then the capable hand smears these materials on her abdomen and the forceps, then she enters into the womb accompanied by them, and seeks a place to anchor the fetal hooks in it. The suitable positions for this are.
If the fetus is positioned head down, anchor the fetal hooks in one of its eyes or ears or mouth or navel or back or near the breech or under the shoulders.
If it is positioned on its feet, in the breech position, the fetal hook should be grasped with the right hand and placed between the fingers of the left hand, then the left hand enters along with it and anchors the fetal hook in one of the positions mentioned earlier.
Continue until you reach something empty, then anchor another or third fetal hook in her cervix to balance the pull and not direct it towards one side. Then move steadily without the pull being only upwards, but moving towards all sides.
It is not easy to extract as in tooth extraction during gum swelling. It is necessary, between that, to pack the cavity with a bandage; if one side of it is blocked, it is necessary to anoint some fingers with oil and enter them from there so as to turn what is blocked. If any infant comes out, the forceps are moved to other places.
It is not done easily, until all the infants are extracted. If a hand comes out before another and it cannot be returned due to its swelling, then it is necessary to break it; afterwards, it should be drawn back until all of them come out in pieces.
Either in the wrist or in the ankle, and this must be done in both hands and feet; if the head of the infant is large and there is pressure upon its exit, or if there is water collected in its head, then it is necessary to enter between the fingers with a probe.
Crush its head so that the water comes out or press it with the instrument called the forceps, which is depicted alongside other instruments in the illustration that follows.
Likewise, this is done if the infant is large-headed. It is necessary to crush its skull or press it with the forceps as previously mentioned; then, the bones are extracted with forceps, and when the head comes out and there is pressure during extraction, it should be crushed until the fluid in the chest is released.
If the chest does not join together, and it does not open by itself, then cut as much as you can. If it is below the abdomen or there is pus in it, it is necessary to pack it until the moisture drains out from it.
If the fetus is on the mother's thigh, then drawing it out is easy and you will straighten it into the womb. If pressure is felt near the abdomen or chest, it is necessary to draw it out with a hook that you have shaped with your hand and pierce the abdomen or chest until the content drains out from them.
When all the limbs are extracted and the head is withdrawn, place it in the left hand. If the womb is open, insert the left hand into its neck and grasp the head with your fingers. Then insert a cannula or two cannulas into it and pull it by them.
If the womb is tightly closed with a hot, narrow opening, do not push on it. Instead, use cold, damp objects and apply them and sit in warm water and soak it.
And if the fetus is on the side, it can be moved. Do not perform what we mentioned for a living fetus unless it cannot be moved in which case it should be cut and removed. It is necessary that nothing remains of the placenta inside the womb. If your treatment is finished, use what we have mentioned to treat hot, painful abscesses that occur in the womb.
If a flow of blood appears, let it descend into tight water and apply all treatments. I have seen a woman who had given birth, the baby died inside her, then she tied another knot on it.
Then the second baby also died, and after a long time, she had a swelling and fever in her examination, and it inflated until it opened and released pus. I called her for treatment, so I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal. She placed some strong adhesive plasters on it.
A bone came out from the place, then she stayed for some days, and another bone came out. She was amazed that her belly had no bones in it because the baby was dead. She thought that the bones were of the dead baby. So, she explored the wound and took out many bones from the head of the baby.
I did not stop following that until she took out many bones from her, and the woman was in good health, and it had been leaking pus easily for a long time. I have brought this rare case to you here.
For there is knowledge and help for the physician in making treatment with his hands.
Chapter Seven and Sixty-seven.
In it are images of the tools required for the extraction of the fetus.
Image of a forceps used to open the vaginal canal:.
This tool referred to as forceps in books, which has two handles except that this forceps should be softer than the tool and made either of ivory or boxwood, and each handle should have a width of two fingerbreadths.
And their shapes are similar to a thumb, and their lengths are slightly more than half a fingerbreadth, and in the middle of the handles there are protrusions made of the same wood, which have been carved into them; each protrusion is about half a fingerbreadth or slightly longer, and their widths are similar to or slightly larger than two thumb widths.
They (the forceps) enter the vagina to open the cervix, when manipulating the fetus. Another figure of similar kind is shown, gentler and smaller:.
Made from the wood of walnut or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that they have rods at one end as you see, with each rod being about the thickness of a finger and the widths of the handles being two fingers. If you want to open the womb with them.
Place the woman on a stretcher with her legs open wide between them, then insert these rods softly in the vagina and hold the lower part of the tool between her feet. Then open your hand with the tool as you would with forceps, to whatever extent you wish to open the womb. Until she makes what she desires, another figure of a speculum is shown:.
A picture of the lever that moves the fetus:.
A picture of the forceps used to grasp the head of the fetus:.
It resembles a pair of pliers with teeth on its ends, as you see. It can be made straight like forceps in this picture, with teeth resembling the teeth of a saw which cuts and severs:.
Image of a probing tool also:
Image of a ligature:.
This ligature contains a little wire to prevent it from breaking when drawing the fetus with it, image of a double-ended ligature:.
Image of two wide forceps for cutting the fetus:.
These tools, with their increasing varieties and the speed at which they were manufactured by the craftsman raised their value among people so you should not ignore a tool being equipped as it will inevitably be needed:.
The eighth and seventy-seventh section.
On the extraction of a tumor.
If the tumor is firmly attached after expiration, it is necessary to order the assistant to hold herself then pinch her with forceps and press hard on her mouth and nose so that if it comes out with this or otherwise take a sheet:.
And pierce the cover and put in it ointments for the mouth of the uterus such as fodens, sadeh, shabt, babunj, sheikh, salicha, qantourioun, all these drugs or some of them, immerse them in water and carry them to the fire then place a copper tube on the opening of the cover of the sheet and the other side in the mouth of the uterus.
Hold it (the patient) until the hot irons reach the navel, then squeeze as previously stated; for the pus will come out quickly. If, after this treatment, it does not come out, command the one who can do so to rub his left hand in sheep fat or ointment of bruises.
Then insert it (the probe) into the navel and search for the pus; if it strikes it, grasp it and draw it out little by little until it comes out. If it is tightly attached in the depth of the navel, place your hand as we have described until you find the pus, then gently pull it out.
In order not to let the navel fall during strong pulling, it is better to move it towards the sides, right and left, then gradually increase the pulling force; for it will respond when doing so and free itself from adhesion. If there is pus in the navel, we have previously described the treatment as squeezing and the method of pressure and cauterization.
If it does not come out with all the treatments we have previously described, then you may try to apply force on it for re-pulling; but it is better to tie what comes out from it to the navel of the woman and then squeeze it with four fingers. For it will soften after a few days.
The incision heals and comes out except that if it decomposes, then a foul smell rises from it to the body and the head and it hurts. Therefore, it is necessary to use agreeable smoke.
Some early herbal smoke and oil mixtures, such as the woman's device for touching scabies and similar conditions, have been tested:.
It is made of copper resembling canvas or of brass, with the narrow end placed in the fire and the wide end on the coal, and the oil kept there until the oil goes away and something else comes out.
The Ninth and Seventieth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Non-Pierced Warts.
If many children have warts that are not pierced, it is advisable for the person who is able to pierce them with a sharp awl and if not, then tie it tightly with a hard thread and be careful not to touch the nerves.
Then, soak it in a solution and oil, then treat it with a poultice until it heals. If you fear that it may break open, place a lead tube over the piercing for several days and remove it when the child wants to heal.
The rupture of the scrotum can also be caused by injury or abscess. It should be drained first, then treated as described earlier.
Chapter twenty.
Treatment of abscesses that occur in the lower region.
Abscesses that occur in the lower region are to be opened and drained, which happens close to or outside the scrotum, or within one of its sides. The abscess may be singular or multiple.
If the abscess is swollen, it should be opened and pus of a watery white or thin yellow color will flow out of it. Such abscesses may drain into the spermatic vessels or the bladder and not be draining. The draining abscesses can be recognized by the discharge of pus and gas when a probe is inserted.
If pus has come out of it, and there are openings from it into the intestine, to the bladder and to the urethra, or into the scrotum, and what is known as a hernia into the saddle [area], such cases should be treated.
If your little finger gets trapped in the saddle and a thin wire of brass or iron enters the hernia, but it is not within the hernia, then treat it. But if there is a protrusion [of the hernia], insert a thin wire of lead or horse hair into it.
Until you feel the wire or the hair in your little finger, if you do not feel any pain or discomfort and nothing from the hernia protrudes or emits wind, pus, or foul smell as we said, then it is not a hernia. In this case, proceed with treatment.
If the hernia is opening into the bladder or urethra, a sign of it is the discharge of urine from it and its refusal to be treated with medication. As for when the hernia opens into the scrotum or groin, a sign of this is the arrival of the wire there.
If it does not contain a joint to the bone, and there is a wound near its side and continuous discharge from it, and it does not heal, there is no treatment for it and it should not be tampered with. These open wounds are all excluded from the cauterization of the cauterizer.
Treatment of such wounds is futile for those who foolishly attempt to treat them, and as for those that are not open or not continuous, the cauterization by iron is suitable for them according to my description and what I have tried, and it means to apply pressure between your fingers on its surface.
The person who is causing the bleeding should be raised up and his arm pushed towards the abdomen, then a copper or lead wire should be inserted until it reaches the joint if there is one in the finger, then feel around the area like a chair. If you sense the end of the wire, insert your thumb into the area.
If you sense the wire in your thumb, it has emerged by itself without feeling between your thumb and it with a probe or flesh, then be assured that it is open and there is no need for cauterization as we mentioned earlier.
They said that it makes bleeding stop in some people during childbirth, and the treatment which is beneficial for this is to apply a fine cupping glass according to the size of the nar (womb), as it is introduced into the nar up to its seat, then it is withdrawn twice or thrice.
They said that all those excess, hardened meats resembling bird's intestines which have been burned should be treated by fatting ointment in oil, until the burnt meat comes out, then it is treated with salves containing alum, so that it stops bleeding.
Unless another treatment is applied, it will not stop bleeding permanently; if the cord was introduced and did not reach the fingertip in the seat of the uterus and there was a thick covering of meat or membrane between them, and you see the uterus protruding above the skin surface, then the skin is torn from the beginning of the uterus. You tear the cord along with the skin in the uterus until the tearing reaches where the end of the cord is and it separates, and the cord falls off, then you remove the hardened meats resembling bird's intestines and there remains nothing from it.
Then treat it with caustic lime until it blisters. If the bleeding persists and there is a swelling both in your condition and in the affected area, cut away that flesh; it is best to apply fire or a sharp cautery because burning helps to coagulate the excessive flesh.
Cut away the blood and drain the fluids, then treat it with oil of roses or powdered sulfur in oil until the area is clean and the burned flesh comes out in the cleaning process. After that, treat the wound with sharp cautery for tough meat.
This is the medicine that clears and stops bleeding, so if it stops then it has been cured and there will be no relapse. If the nar has reached a deep wound below the surface of the body, insert your finger into the wound and probe it with it.
If you feel a cord and there is a covering between it and you, whether it is flesh or some other substance and it is near the opening, then do not work on it except by means of patience and prayer, and this is because there are three possible ways to deal with it: either to press it until it comes out, or to use an emetic such as vinegar, or to incise it and let the pus drain.
If it is to be cut until it reaches its hollow, so that the fillet and treatment can be performed close by without cutting into the surrounding muscles, then, due to its proximity, pus may come out unintentionally. Then treat it as previously mentioned, perhaps it will heal as we said.
If it is to perform that incision and then cut it close to the seat as previously mentioned, either with a string or another sharp tool, then clean all the contaminated meat within the wound as much as possible by cutting.
Then ram the wound edges and the upper jaw until it is closed, leaving the nostrils open within the seat. This makes it less noticeable, and the nose may break on this feature.
If you insert the string into the nose and it is near the seat on the side of the body with the skin and the edge of the seat, then take a string pierced at its end like the hook of an awl in this image:.
Place a loose thread of five or about that number in it, then insert the string through the nose until it reaches its hollow. If it is an opening in the seat from inside near it.
Draw the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the wound and pulling out one side of the thread, then gather both ends together, tighten them, and leave it for a day or two. Whenever the thread is cut in the flesh, tighten it firmly until that piece of meat between the threads is severed and falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and closes up.
If the nose of the Nasara (non-Muslims) is not open, open it as much as possible without causing damage to the bone structure. Then proceed as previously described until it heals and closes up.
Picture of the shovel-shaped forceps used to crush the nerves, the handle should be very sharp while the other part should not be so as not to cut anything unnecessary as you can see:.
Chapter one and twenty.
In the veins of the bowel that bleed and are cut, treatment for wounds.
The bowels are located in layers, either inside the abdominal cavity resembling pomegranate seeds or like grapes, and they have both small and large blood vessels that bleed continuously.
The bandage should be one or many and should be outside the wound, except that which is from outside the wound should be in lesser amount with less moisture. It drains water white or a little blood continuously and it remains on the color of the body.
Treat the one that is inside the wound by instructing the assistant to dig and clean it until the wound is exposed, and then you see the tendons. Quickly bind them with sutures or hold them with forceps, then cut it at its roots if it does not cling to the sutures due to moisture and wetness.
Hold it with a rough splint or a sharp piece of bone, or pull it with your fingers, then cut it. After cutting, place some pointed forceps on it to maintain its position or fix it as needed in the opening of the knee joint.
Then treat it with various treatments until it heals, if the wound does not open itself, instruct the assistant to inject it with a needle to irrigate and clean it quickly when it is exposed by the assistant, as the tendons outside the wound are easy to handle.
It should be taken with your fingers or tied with a linen thread and cut, then treated as previously described until it heals; for those who dislike cutting with iron, a solution made from alum should be applied, taking a thin cord and inserting it into the abscess.
Draw the pus to the surface with a lance and insert it into its origin from the other side, then twist the cord below the lancet and it will be resistant and tighten the pus severely and firmly, then tie the cord and remove the lancet; do this for all the abscesses but leave one untouched.
To release the pus from it, then place a cup coated with oil or wax on the abscess and instruct the patient to inhale; leave it until the abscess has fallen off. If the abscess falls, treat it with cautery and all other treatments until it heals.
As for the treatment of ulcers, it is often due to the accumulation of pus and the thickening of the tissue; if it persists and does not respond to medicine, then it should be excavated with a scalpel or fingers until it becomes soft and the upper layer that prevents healing is removed.
Then treat it until it breaks at the desired point, if it does not break then repeat with a stronger splint until it fractures completely and softens, then treat it; for it will heal.
The second and eighty-ninth chapter.
On the treatment of fractured bones, non-fractured bones, and stiff joints and soft joints.
The ligament is a continuous band resembling the color of the body, found throughout the body and particularly in the soles of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut what surrounds the ligament and bind it with a bandage or splint, then remove it and treat it; if you wish, you can stitch it as in its chapter, and as for stiff joints, one of them is a hard nodule rough on top of the skin.
It often occurs in the hands of children, and its treatment is to stretch it out and cut or burn it with a hot iron or medication until it falls off; if you wish, you can stitch it as directed in the text.
Ligaments can be cut with the instrument I have mentioned in treating joint stiffness, and stiff joints are also known as nodules that are hard and rough on top of the skin, penetrating deeply; when it is cold, it feels like a toad's venom on it.
In the body, all of it and more is found in the hands. Treatment consists of taking a catgut or strong sinew cord and placing it around the abscess until the circle of the cord surrounds its sides. Then turn your hand with the cord until it breaks what is surrounding the abscess.
Place it deeply in the flesh and drain the abscess from its origin, if desired, do this with a copper or iron wire on this image:.
Keep the top of the cord at the tip closed to make it easier for the fingers to grasp and hold it, and if you wish, place the abscess in one of the channels in the fist.
Third and Thirtieth Section.
In the images of tools used for lancing boils, pimples and wounds.
The lancing instrument may be made of brass, zinc or copper and may be hollow or solid, and this tool may be small or large depending on its use. The one used for treating small children or those with constricted or irritated anus will be very small, while the lancet for larger patients will be larger, image of a large lancet:.
The upper band that connects the sinew should be broad in this manner, having a stop where the sinew is joined, as you see, and the lower side that enters into the socket shall be narrow towards the bone on one side with two holes, and on the other side with one hole.
The cavity of the hole should be deep or slightly deep, and the sinew that receives the medicine made from animal horn or bone splints should be formed in the shape of a small spoon, its diameter being narrow.
Many holes should be drilled in a circular motion, and between each hole there will be a small notch, then thread should be passed through these holes with a thin needle from silk or similar materials and collect the sinew in the shape of a spoon. If medicine is placed firmly in the reamer between two stones, then it should be drilled with it. This is a circular representation of the sinew and the hole.
The method of drilling is to fill the bone or horn with medicine, keeping it as deep as possible and beware that it does not become too hot or too cold, then the plunger is placed on its surface and pushed upwards.
It is placed underneath (it), then the edge of the pincers is anointed with oil or egg white or something similar, then it is introduced into the cavity accompanied by a servant holding the pincers, and he grinds it strongly until everything in the pincers is emptied into the cavity.
Then the pincers are withdrawn and the patient is made to lean against a wall, for if the medicine is absorbed by the wound for exit, let him grasp whatever he can and if he falls asleep during the night, it will be as effective in the ulcer, for if the pincers are inserted into an ulcer and hasten its exit, then the pincers should be held until they discharge.
If there are boils or abscesses that are painful, then the pincers should be very gentle and soft compared to the pincers used for children, and this is a picture of a gentle closed pincer with its leather cover.
The Fourth and Eighty-Ninth Section.
In the Treatment of Surgery.
I have mentioned in the divisions of treating what harms the kidneys, and here I will explain their treatment by hand and with medications to perfection. I say that surgeries differ according to what is present in the surgery and according to the place where the incision occurs.
The things that are numerous in surgeries are as many as pebbles, stones or blades of swords or knives, or drills with bone saws or gouges, and so forth.
As for surgeries in various body locations, they are such as cuts on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and so forth from the organs.
I will describe the treatment of some surgeries to establish a measure and principle for all surgeries, and I will begin with simple surgeries of the head, particularly because compound ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
When a simple wound occurs on the head that is not a bone fracture and it was only skin cut, and the wound is large and one fears the development of hot worm, one should seek out the quinid (a type of herb or root) to its location. Do not delay that and extract from it (the quinid) to the extent of its strength, unless something prevents it, and most importantly, if the blood that is extracted from the wound flows easily, the extraction should be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warning: Abstain from overeating, drinking, and heavy food. If unable to do so, one should eat little and avoid meat and drinks. The wound should be carried with caution if it occurs and the affected area is a hot, swollen abscess in the fat of the thigh or with alcohol that has been seized.
If the wound is free of hotness, carry it with care if its blood has not changed into yellow pus for a little while, but if it has already changed, use some antiseptic.
Continue to irrigate the wound until it dries up, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and caused by a sword cut or similar and the eyes have not met its benefits, sew it up as I described in the abdominal surgeon's sutures.
If the skin is exposed and connected to the bone without any swelling, cut it off then treat the wound with medicines that induce hardening of the flesh and order the patient to eat foods rich in nutrients such as garlic and onions, etc.
If a boil occurs in the skin without it being connected to the bone, cut off all of the affected area and cauterize it, then treat it. In these types of wounds, if there are veins or arteries from which blood flows out and is not stopped by medicines, probe the veins.
If it (the wound) does not suppurate, make it suppurate by applying a plaster and bind it. If necessity requires and the remedies we have mentioned do not help, keep cauterizing until the blood stops. These surgical procedures are simple, so easy treatment is sufficient, letting them heal on their own and they will heal with their own blood.
Before it (the wound) is exposed to air, the recipe for the plaster is to take a part from lime, a part from alum and three parts of burnt or unburnt clay, grind them all into powder, mix it with water, strain and apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly until it adheres well to it.
The artery is tied off, then it is pressed from above with the help of leeches and left not to heal until there is no inflammation. It will not release medicine until it breaks out, and this can be done by clay if lime and alum are not available.
This action can also be done in many major surgeries if the position is mastered and it is pressed and sealed, and these surgeries were straight with their own blood as long as they are not exposed to air. However, if the air has changed some of them slightly or especially during the summer.
This passage in Arabic text by Albucasis suggests: "In this case of ulcers, it does not mean to treat as described earlier by applying certain pressed medicaments or a paste made from barley flour and water with honey until the pus flows, then treating it with other treatments until it heals.
In case of injury causing a bone fracture that is smooth, pull it gently, and I have mentioned the treatment for skull fractures in a previous chapter, in the surgery of the neck. If injury occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a skull fracture if it is simple.
If a nerve has been severed in the neck or arm, there is no remedy other than avoiding treatment that tightly binds such as tourniquets and similar items because they injure the nerve and cause pain.
A cold, hard object should not be placed on the wound as the nerve endings are cold and have a finer connection with the brain than other parts. The treatment for such wounds is usually mild medications like diluted vinegar soaked in hot water or olive oil, or tallow and honey.
If you wash with cold water and various metal stones on this kind of wound or a moist suture, and if the wound is large, use stitching or hold it together with bandages then treat until it heals.
If a hollow cavity occurs in the wound and pus accumulates beneath it, if a vein is cut and blood flows out, tie or sew it up or apply a compress if necessary.
If some or all of the hair follicles are cut and glands are opened, gather the skin together with stitches at the site of the cut and do not press on the hair follicles but sew and place it back in its natural shape then tighten it firmly and leave it for a few days.
Then treat it with sutures containing a binding and drying agent until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it. If there are splinters of bone present, remove them all or as much as possible and leave it to heal and allow it to be drained.
If the wound is linear, apply the incision described, if it opens in the wound a bone appears and becomes visible, treat it as described in its chapter, in thoracotomy and between the shoulders.
If the wound is either linear or slashed, and you observe a cavity in it, then if breath escapes from the injured party, know that it is a combat wound. If there is no cavity and it is linear with bleeding, do not immediately apply incision and sutures, nor press it for fear that blood fills its cavity.
Lead the wounded person to the heart and kill him, but make two incisions in it with a sharp instrument and close them during daylight for two times, if the incision does not appear, then make an opening in the mouth of the wound with a finger to drain any liquids that come out from it and let the wounded rest on the wound.
Remove what is accumulated in it, and if the injured has not improved or experienced swelling, redness, or tightness in the chest, and other conditions are normal, know that the wound is safe, treat it with ointment and other treatments until healed.
If the hand or the wrist is frequently strained, know that it has become paralyzed; treat it from its opening. The cause of injury is not to accumulate, and if it has reached the chest or back, treat it with what comes next in sewing.
If it is large or small, if there is a fracture in the bone and pieces of bone have been broken off, examine the injury and try to remove those pieces if they are free; if they are not free, leave them until.
The injury heals more easily when it is incised, and as for other injuries that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment should be decided according to what we have mentioned.
The Fifth and Eighteenth Chapter.
On abdominal surgery, evacuation of pus, and sewing it up.
The wound that opens up into the abdomen may be large or small and central; if it is large, pus or several pusses may come out of it, in which case insertion and sewing it up will be more difficult.
The small wound may also be difficult from another aspect; in this case, its closure must be more difficult and the pus, if it does not break out on its own at the right time, will swell and harden, making insertion more difficult. Therefore, the central wound is considered best because it does not complicate matters with the difficulty of closing the wound or the difficulty in introducing the pus into its place, as it does in these types.
Know that sewing the abdomen is done in four types of stitches, two general stitches are suitable for sewing the abdomen and other surgeries of the body, while the remaining two specialized stitches serve only for sewing the abdomen.
If the injury is small and something from the wound exits and it becomes blocked, this applies to one or both of two cases: either for the diminution of the wound as we mentioned earlier, or because the air was blown into the wound.
If it is as such, it is necessary to cauterize it by applying a wet compress or gauze in warm water and leave it there until the air escapes.
The drink that contains extract is better than water alone in the analysis of breath. If you see the breath has become foamed, pour boiling water with crushed or powdered glass into it; it will settle more easily when it enters.
If recovery does not occur after this treatment, make a small incision in the wound using the instrument that cuts veins and apply the first treatment again if possible, as the second application is necessary only when the first fails and when forceful measures are required due to lack of improvement. This is an image of the instrument:.
The pointed end of the instrument should be curved and limited, while the other end should not be limited, and its tip should not be sharp but slightly rounded. It resembles a small syringe as you can see. When the wound is wide open and water enters it, it should be returned to its natural shape.
Its special place is that if possible, it should be used in this way; as for when the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen, the patient must lie on his back and the person administering the treatment should raise his head and if it is located in the upper abdomen, the patient's head and chest should be raised from below.
And similarly, if the puncture is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, make your intention and goal always to approach from the side containing the surgery, thus it should be used in major surgeries and middle surgeries as well.
And for minor surgeries, place it as you can, then prepare an assistant by your side who will hold the puncture entirely and close his eyes, then he should open it for the one in charge of stitching to take something after another.
This is the general stitching feature, to take a thread or multiple threads according to the size of the wound, then leave a margin on the side of the puncture equal to the thickness of the skin and sew one thread without putting thread in the seam of the skin. With the seam of the scalpel under the skin from inside until it is extracted from that side, and after gathering the skin folds and the seam of the scalpel which became four layers, then tighten with a thick thread around the suture several times until the wound edges meet firmly.
Then leave the thickness of a finger also and sew another thread, then tie it with the thread as you did with the first suture, keep doing this with as many threads as needed until the wound is completely filled and the suture is evenly spaced between the skin and the wound.
The pointed probe should be long and thin so as not to cut the flesh or muscle, and it is difficult to enter the skin; therefore, it should be central in both the probe and the lancet, and the probe should not pierce the skin near the edge.
It is not good to cut the flesh swiftly and open the wound before it is closed, nor to keep a distance while stitching lest the wound be prevented from healing; then the edges of the probe are cut so as not to injure the patient during sleep or cause him harm by applying pressure from all sides when he grips the probe.
Leave it until you learn that the wound has closed, and this type of stitching with the probe is more suitable for minor surgeries because it may suffice in sewing it with one or two probes or something similar.
As for the second method of stitching, it is to gather the stitches in four layers, meaning the skin and subcutaneous tissue in one pass with a probe containing a continuous thread adjusted in both the probe and the lancet; then if you pierce the probe with this layer of four, return the probe to the side from which it started.
The thread should be crossed from the top of the wound so that stitching is done according to the herringbone stitch, which the surgeon presses with his thumb and leaves a space between each stitch after the small finger has passed through, and this stitch is known by all people.
With this stitch, a surgical incision was made on the leg of a man who had been wounded by arrows and the wound was deeper than a finger and it had burst from his side about 15 fingers from the middle of the side, and the wound was in the center of the abdomen.
He was brought back after he kept his wounds open for four and twenty hours, so the wound became inflamed in about fifteen days and they treated him until he purged and lived afterwards for many years, managing all his affairs, and the doctors judged that he would not recover from a fistula (a abnormal passage or connection between two organs or cavities of the body).
And it is amazing that I did not treat him with medicine because I was in a place where there was nothing for medicines, so I used plain cotton on the wound twice a day and dedicated myself to wash it with water of honey until he recovered.
And as for one of the types of specific stitching, I remember it from the speech of Galenus and it is that the stitching starts with the skin and the thread enters from outside to inside, so if the thread goes into the skin and into the golden muscle that runs along the length of the abdomen, all of it.
Leave the probe in the side into which you inserted the iron, and draw out the iron from its opposite side within the wound, in the other probe from inside to outside in the other probe from without to within. If you draw it out, draw it out again in the same probe from without to within from outside.
Leave the probe in the side where it is, and draw out the iron from its opposite side within the wound, and draw it along with your pulling on it in the probe until you have drawn all of it out.
Then, start from this side and guide the probe along with the one in the other side where the iron is, and draw out the iron from the skin that is nearby, then return it to that skin, and guide the probe of the other side along with this one from within the wound.
Draw it out from the skin that is on its side, and do this again until you have sewn up all of the wound in this example, and this type of stitching is called "sewing of the fringes for the fringe".
Sew the probe once from one side with the skin, and leave it alone from the other side until it is empty, as for the second type of unique stitching that Al-Zahrawi also mentioned, this is his speech.
The translation of the excerpt is: "It should be sutured similarly to how surgeons of a certain group do, by gathering each part with its corresponding problematic area. Bring together the edges of the incision to the other and do the same for the edges of the wound. This should be done according to what has been described for you.
"It should be sutured from outside the wound edge to inside it and then back out, and then do the same for the other side of the incision. Repeat this process.
"Sew it from inside out on the other side of the incision, which is on the opposite side, and this is a better stitch than the common easy stitch that has been described. This is the opinion of Galenus, and some have said that abdominal suturing can be done with two sutures. "This means inserting a single suture and beginning by sewing the first suture from your side to the other side, then sewing the second suture from the opposite side back to you, following the herringbone stitch.
Know that if a wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its suturing will be more difficult than in other locations within the abdomen, and as for closing a wound with suture, it should be done according to the rules of all surgeries. This is because if you find the wound clean with its blood before the air changes it and you reap the fat (around the wound) and mark it and judge (the position), then lay the ligature upon it.
If the wound has been affected by air, lay some thongs upon it until it becomes firm and the sutures drop out and the pus and mucus settle, then treat it as you would any other surgery until it heals.
If no medication is available, lay cotton wool on it from the time it starts to weep and change it twice a day as you know until it heals. In most cases, additional treatment will not be necessary if the surgeries are simple; however, if you fear that the major organs may share in the pain of the wound.
It is necessary to apply a soft cloth in warm oil or lard and place it around the areas between the nipples and pubis, as heat will relieve pain or swelling in those areas. If you suspect there may be bruising or inflammation, give it frequent hot black draughts.
It is not in doubt that if ulceration has reached the cavity and becomes an opening into its depth, then know that what was from the cavities was hard, it is easier to heal, and what was from them was delicate, it is harder to heal.
As for the known ulceration, known as sciatica, it does not accept healing by surgery that takes place near the buttock, and this is due to a large number of vessels and its hardness, as well as the roughness of its wound and its proximity to nature of nerve, but if the one who has undergone the cut found relief, then treat the ulcer accordingly.
If it has passed a period of time and turned either green or black, then it should be compressed with thread above the place that is black to prevent bleeding, for indeed in the wound there are vessels and arteries, then cut what is not this [black area].
Make the ends of the thread connected from below the incision, outside it to make it easier for you to sew and extract it when the wound falls out and heals, remember the wound that is in the ulcer, if it shows a hole, small.
It is possible for some people to faint when they see a man who has been cut in the abdomen with a spear and the wound was on the right side, and the wound becomes suppurating and gas comes out of it, so I treated him as if I did not dare to heal it. I have not evacuated the pus until it has ripe and suppuration at the site, when I saw the place suppurating, I feared that something bad might happen to him in his depth, but nothing bad happened to him from this suppuration and he remained in the best condition. He is healthy, he eats and drinks and walks and goes to the bathhouse and is content in his service. Some of those with experience have said that when a wound is inflicted while the patient is small, it should be cauterized on this condition.
Take the large bees, then press their heads together, then place a bee from them, open-mouthed on the wound. If it is held and pressed, its head will stick and not dissolve. Then place another bee near the first one.
Continue to do this with several bees according to the size of the wound, then roll it over and bandage the wound. These heads will remain stuck in the wound until the wound heals and there is no fear of the bad effects of suppuration, and the wound may also be bound with thin thread.
The one who sows the animal skin which adheres to it after it enters the vein, this is done by taking one end of this thread from the animal skin and it should be stitched then tied in its end with a thin thread made of cotton, then insert that thread into the vein. In it is a cord of the Egyptians, he wraps with it the toe then directs it to the marrow. This strike is in the art of suturing and the Egyptians only perform it on the path of courage and hope.
If the wound is large and wide, and in no case if it is found in one of the toes, there is no trick or relief from it.
The Sixth and Eighteenth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Ulcers and Scabs.
Know that every wound or abscess that becomes ulcerated and progressive, and becomes a running sore without healing and the pus constantly emanates from it, is called in general terms as "Naswar" in any limb, and we call it "Zakam" (running sores).
This is in fact a hardened white bead without pain, having a hollow like the eye of a bird.
And for that reason, it is named a "bead" (Rishah), and it may be moist at times constantly emanating pus, and sometimes the moisture stops, but in some instances this moisture can be abundant or scarce, hard or soft.
It has been mentioned in the classification of surgeries that every ulcer that does not heal and there is no muscle growth in it, this is one of nine reasons. One of these reasons may be due to a lack of blood in the body or its insulation, or due to the presence inside it and on its edges of hardened meat that prevents the growth of good meat. It may be because it is much swollen and broken, or because the incision in itself is septic and the matter which pours out is not suitable for treatment, or because the drug is unsuitable for its cure, or because of a malady that has occurred in the town from the species of worms, or because of something particular in the town.
It may be because it is much swollen and broken, or because the incision in itself is septic and the matter which pours out is not suitable for treatment, or because the drug is unsuitable for its cure, or because of a malady that has occurred in the town from the species of worms, or because of something particular in the town. It is present in the city of Serqupsat, where diseases are difficult and tonsillitis is prevalent naturally, or because there is one or more bones, which have all been proven and their signs, causes and treatments with medications have been divided.
It is necessary here that I inform you about the treatment of nosebleeds and zygomas which are done with manual work, know that nasal vessels can occur in all parts of the body, some of which end up in large arteries and veins or nerves.
or to the nose, or to the throat, or to the neck, or to the back of the head, or to the spinal column of the many joints like the hand and leg, some of which approach the vicinity of a limb of the head and similar to that.
If any of these (specific conditions) are found in this state, they are among the severe diseases that do not accept treatment and working with them is an effort and ignorance. If any of the conditions does not reach these mentioned places (which have been described), let alone attempting to treat it.
To learn this, take a probe made of copper or iron if the wound is sensitive, and check it with it. If there is a foreign body in the wound, use a sharp probe made of lead, as lead does not stick to flesh.
When entering, it throbs and approaches the foreign body, if the wound has many openings, you cannot probe them all. So, push one of its ends into one of the openings, the moisture that you push out with it will flow towards the other openings and relieve them.
From it (the probe), withdraw the examination on any side where you can determine if there is a bone, cartilage or if the wound has narrowed due to swelling, and stop at every such condition with your limit of knowledge based on your understanding of its pain when you touch the location.
Among the reasons and causes of pain, if all these have been encountered and the reality is confirmed, then proceed to treatment with certainty. It means looking, if it exists.
If the navigator appears clearly near a safe position distant from nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places previously mentioned, then break it open on what follows in the description and remove whatever decayed flesh, rotten meat, and excessive meat there is.
If it does not grow in the mouth from meat or pus and so on, and if treated, it heals, if the navigator is distant from the buttocks and remains stable, then break it open as deep as possible, then cleanse it of all rotten meat.
Then use a hot poultice in the medicines that are sharp and apply it to the navigator which you reach with iron, do this several times until the sharp medicine eats away all that remains of the corruption in the navigator's buttock.
Then force the healthy flesh to grow around it until it heals, if it does not heal with that, then cut it according to its description, if the cause of the navigator is bone and it is good for you, then probe it and break it open as you have been instructed, unless anything prevents you from doing so.
If you find a bone, muscle or limb (as previously mentioned), and you discover decay and corruption in it, remove the corrupted part until it disappears, then treat the remaining part with what cures it until it recovers. If it does not recover and the putrefaction persists as before, do as before.
Know that you have not reached all the decay, so discover everything on top of it and scrape off the crust and cleanse it with as much effort as possible, then force it to heal. If it recovers or else, know that this decay is in a hidden place distant from the decay, so discover everything on top of it.
Scrape off the crust and cleanse it with as much effort as possible, for if the bone was rotten, it was a small bone that could be pulled out using fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
If there were many bones, scrape and pull them all out without leaving anything behind with your effort. If something resists from the ligaments without it being in danger, cut those ligaments and the flesh if there was any and remove the bones.
If you cannot remove the bones in time, bear the wound and leave it for days until what surrounds those bones (the flesh and ligaments) decomposes. Maintain the wound carefully so that the wound does not become infected as a result of the hole you made during your work.
If you fear that, place a bandage soaked in pulverized sulfur with oil, or a bandage soaked in native Egyptian pitch or one of the green pitches over it. When she softens and swells, these ligaments loosen and the bone becomes easily extracted and drawn out.
If one large bone, such as the shin or thigh bone, is fractured and only its surface has been damaged, grind it coarsely until the blackness and damage disappear, then force the fracture. If a large portion of the bone is fractured and the fracture has reached its medullary cavity, there is no choice but to saw it.
Cut it to the point where the fracture ends, then set and heal it until it unites. I inform you of an example that happened to a man in his thigh so as to serve as a model for your treatment. This man had suffered from this condition recently.
About thirty years ago, he experienced pain in his thigh due to internal movement towards the thigh until the matter reached the thigh and caused severe swelling and inflammation with no external cause. Despite this, the condition continued for a long time due to the mistakes of the physicians until the abscess opened.
Materials from it abounded and he was incompetent in their treatment until the wound became necrotic and many tunnels formed in it, each of which exuded pus and the body became swollen. A group of physicians including elders who were not skillful in handcraft attempted to treat it.
Until I examined the wound, I saw that the materials were draining intensely from those tunnels and the man's body was rotting, his skin turning pale. I inserted a probe into one of the tunnels, then felt it along the bone. Then I probed all the tunnels.
I found them connected to each other from all sides of the wound. Then, when I opened one of the tunnels, I discovered some bone that was rotten and decayed, blackened and softened, until I broke through to the muscle. What I had uncovered began to spread.
The rotten bone was removed and I believed that there was no other decay in the bone, which I had severed and spread. Then I forced the wound with caustic medications for a longer period of time. It did not heal, then I checked again and found another piece of bone above the first incision.
Found corruption connected to the bone, then what appeared of that corruption also spread. I applied pressure but it did not subside and nor did the swelling. I probed it further, but did not remove any part of the bone, nor did the pressure subdue it until I amputated from the bone in a piecemeal manner.
I pulled it out with a hook, then applied medication and the swelling quickly subsided and disappeared. However, this procedure must be repeated for such cases of weakness or rarity, and fear of death due to its recurrence in all instances as a precautionary measure.
A hard mass formed at the location of a bone, and its condition improved in his body and its strength decreased and it became weak in its state, and it did not expose itself to harm from walking, but if the bone was fractured in a part of the body.
It is necessary to spread it on this characteristic, which means taking cords and stretching them along the fractured bone, then commanding someone to pull it upwards. The second cord should be made from coarse rope stronger than the first.
Then tie it on the meat that is beneath the bone, and stretch its side to draw the meat downward. Expose the meat from its location so as not to harm the meat by the saw, and place a stick or flat surface under the bone firmly from below.
If you do that, the saw will not prevent cutting the rotten bone, and it is advisable that the incision be slightly above the site of the rottenness so that there is no depression in the bone, which may remain hidden beneath the skin, forcing you to make another incision.
If the bone is rotten and not continuous, but the decay is in the middle or one of its parts, expose the meat from all sides, then place the stick from below, then incise it from the first side where the decay is.
If you have finished incising from one side, then incise it from the other side, and let the incision be a little distance away from the decay as we said, if the decay is in a joint, separate the rotten joint itself and incise the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is in a joint, there is no other remedy except for amputation, if the decay is in the wrist or ankle, the treatment of it is very difficult, but it is necessary to excise the decay as much as you can and clean it and purify it on any condition that you can.
In any manner that the bone is to be sawn, when neither arteries nor nerves oppose [the operation], and know that many cuts and saws for cutting these bones are numerous according to the position of the bone, its setting, sharpening, smoothing, shortening, lengthening, hardening, and splitting. Accordingly, for each type of work, there should be an appropriate tool for that specific work.
Know that operations themselves can lead to a particular type of tool being required if you have a long staff with knowledge in this craft, as skill in these crafts is essential for understanding diseases. Therefore, for each disease, a tool may be necessary for oneself and I draw for you in the end of this chapter several tools.
Make them models to examine and measures to compare with others, if God wills, an image of a saw:.
Image of another saw:.
Image of a small saw:.
Image of a large saw:.
The head of this drill shall be similar to the end of a drill bit, and it should be carved like the tip of an eskelfaj. It is suitable for breaking bones or large fractures, image of another small drill:.
Image of a simple incision.
The upper beak (and its incision) is made of iron and wrapped with a leather cone, simple carving depicted:.
Image of a final gentle one (?). (This is an incomplete sentence and it's not clear what the subject is)
Image of a final cautery with the edge sealed:.
Small image resembling a string:.
Image of a final small piece (?). (This is an incomplete sentence and it's not clear what the subject is)
The edge of it (?) resembles the saw and is used in many places for fracture of bones, simple image suitable for bone fractures.
The edge resembling a sharp triangle is made of strong iron and it is also necessary to make all the things we have mentioned, such as incisions and pieces, simple image.
Chapter seven and eight. (This seems more like a section title rather than an excerpt)
In cutting the edges and splitting bones: (This seems more like a section title rather than an excerpt)
In case the edges get inflamed either from external or internal causes, if treating the problem with medication does not work and the problem persists in the limb without any relief: (This excerpt is translated, but it's a bit long for an image caption)
It is necessary to cut that limb up to where the damage reaches, so as to save the patient from death or extreme pain, which is worse than losing the limb. A sign of this is that the limb turns black, making it appear as though fire has burned it.
After the limb turns black, the gangrene spreads further towards the body and it must be amputated. Similarly, if the cause of the damage is due to a bite from animals such as sharks, fire ants or rats and their ilk.
If the damage or bite is on a fingertip, amputate the fingertip and do not let the gangrene reach the hand. Similarly, if it has reached the hand, amputate it from its root and do not let the gangrene spread to the forearm.
Similarly, if it has taken hold in the forearm, amputate the forearm at the joint itself. If the gangrene is visible and appears to be approaching the elbow, do not amputate the whole arm as this would lead to the patient's death. Instead, use other treatments within your ability.
Similarly, for the leg if the gangrene is in the fingertip, amputate the fingertip at one of the joints. If it has taken hold in the calf, amputate the leg at its tendon. If it reaches the knee, amputate the leg below the knee.
If the wound has reached above the hip, there is no cure except to leave it and let the patient die. The recipe for amputation or incision is to tighten ligatures below the desired location and then tighten another ligature above it.
The servant should pull one ligature downward and another servant should pull the upper ligature upwards, making the meat between the ligatures bulge with a wide forceps until all the flesh is exposed. Then it should be cut or incised. It is recommended that pieces of charcoal be inserted from all sides.
It is not permissible for the saw to touch the correct location, as it may cause excessive pain and heat to the patient. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, quickly stop or apply some hemostatic agents before continuing with the treatment.
Then bind the wounded limb with ligatures that are suitable for it and treat it until it heals, and I inform you of an example: a man presenting his foot to you with his eye socket exposed as if it had been scooped out, which happened to a man whose foot was burned like fire.
That wound first occurred in his finger, and the man tried to pull it with all his might when he saw the wound, causing further pain and burn. It was then amputated at the joint and it healed.
When a long time had passed, the corruption became apparent in his little finger of the hand. He summoned me and applied the remedy he had on his hand with medicines. However, the remedy did not take effect and he began to suffer in the other finger.
Until the corruption appeared in his hand, he summoned me to amputate it, fearing that the remedy would fail and also fearing death during the amputation since the man's strength was at its peak, so when I hesitated, I departed to my homeland.
I heard that he had tetanus and had his hand amputated with caution, and I only tell this story to be of use for those suffering from this disease and as a guide and lesson on how to treat it.
The Eighth and Thirtieth Chapter.
Treatment of abscesses and the method of injecting them with medicines.
If a boil occurs in one of the flesh-covered parts and lasts for an extended period until it has swollen to such a size that it bursts or breaks, releasing all its contents and leaving the place empty, like an empty container.
The skin, similar to a blister, may have been scratched but has not yet deteriorated. It does not affect the bone, muscle or ligament. From this point it is appropriate for it to be called a cyst and not a nara unless its duration extends until it affects one of these body parts.
When it [the lesion] extends and becomes a nara or zekama, treatment consists of cutting off the entire skin layer completely as it rotates, and making sure that it does not adhere to the site for its deterioration.
If there is a possibility that the skin will adhere and has not yet reached its deterioration, the amount of skin that has a cyst-like lump of meat should be treated with lancing. This is by observing the cyst. If it is large and the unpleasant odor emanating from it is strong, lance it with the Egyptian medication.
The treatment is clarified oil, olive oil and honey mixed in equal parts, collected in a container and boiled until the medication thickens and comes in the form of honey. Then take as much as needed, wet it with water and honey, lance the cyst with it, and press firmly to extract the pus. Leave the medication inside for two hours.
Then, let him (the patient) evacuate during the day until the abscess cleanses and the pus disappears. If this medicine is not available to you, use water of ashes. Take either ashes from carob wood or ashes from poplar wood and pour water on it.
Clean it and irrigate with it until you are sure that the abscess has been washed, if there is no possibility of using Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, irrigate it with water mixed with honey and something from ground gall nuts.
Or irrigate it with honey and drink mixed together, because the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, while the drink relieves the abscess, especially if the drink contains an additive that solidifies and sets. If you do this several times and are sure that the abscess has disappeared, then irrigate it with something that meat grows in it.
Like taking from the gallnut (mastich), clarifying it with oil and water, and drinking a solidifying agent or irrigating it with some medicine that has been proven to have properties as mentioned in the article on medicinal plants, if the abscess is in the mouth and the cannula cannot pass through it.
He should be made to swallow a small amount of iron or place a soft lead in the Egyptian or thief's stone, until it expands. Similarly, if the mouth is also wide, gather your eyes with stitching and leave enough for the probe to enter without excess.
If the mouth of the one suffering from toothache is raised above, break it in a lower place to allow the toothache to drain downwards, because the toothache prevents the meat from growing if it is blocked in the sockets.
If you cannot break the socket downwards as desired, then try to extract the tooth easily based on what is convenient for you and ensure that nothing from the black tooth remains in it.
The medication to be placed on the socket from outside and the method of placing it are as follows: Take a problematic medicinal root, sharpen it into a sliver that fits the entire socket. Then, take a small spoon larger than the mouth of the socket and place a layer of soft medication on it, then place this layer over the problematic one and keep them apart from the mouth of the socket to facilitate the exit of the toothache and remove the large sliver only after.
The number of days [is specified], and as for the one located in the mouth cavity, it is the one that should be removed at every instance to expel what has accumulated in it, so that you may recognize whether pus from it contains a lot or little or is thick or thin.
Also, locate the mouth cavity itself, does its owner feel pain in it or not? Is there a pus or is there no pus, and is there an abscess or not an abscess. If your treatment follows this method and you see the substance that comes out of the mouth cavity to be smooth.
Know that if the mouth cavity has become attached or is about to become attached, then extract it the next day or the third day, and when the wound heals, replace the dressing and renew the linen. If pus comes out from the mouth cavity for a long time, do not be alarmed at its exudation.
Its pus is approaching, for there are some people who obstruct the meat of their wound and there are those who do not do so. If pus comes out from the mouth cavity for many days but it is not thick, know that the mouth cavity has not healed; the healing of the mouth cavity is prevented.
He prolonged the matter, he added in drying of the medications, so that it becomes a medication with moisture inside and in its strength becomes dry, like figs. If he adds excess, the addition is more of quince. And whoever needs what is treated by it should take figs.
It is permissible to use oil and lard, and then dip it in a strong drink, then grind it with it, and use it. Likewise, one can do this if figs are not available or if the honey-cooked figs are prepared until they change color and used or taken from the vine, mulberry, quince, and crushed all of them, and left to rest on the honey which is above fire. Then it is to be spread on a sheet of parchment or honey that has been cooked until it becomes clear, and alum is placed on top of it and pressed.
Various long zarwand, asafoetida, cinnamon bark, caraway seeds, and qanterion can be used alone or in a mixture to be crushed, sieved, and spread on the honey that has been described above, and it is used. If the treatment takes a long time and does not cure with this remedy, know that in its place there will be rottenness.
Has affected the bones or other hard joints or ligaments, treated by the treatment of Nasr as it presents.
The ninth and thirtieth section.
Treatment of abscesses, swellings and extra digits amputation and nail bed cuts.
Abscess is a lot of meat that grows under a swelling in the hand or leg and sometimes in other fingers, if it prolongs and treatment is delayed, it becomes inflamed and feverish.
A cavity or ulcer that eats away at the bone, sometimes it consumes all of it and reaches the bone, so that it has a foul smell and the nail bed becomes wide and its color turns yellow, if treated with what we mentioned in the previous section, but the treatment is not successful.
It is necessary to amputate all the pus that grows from the swelling with iron, then bandage the wound afterwards, for this method is very effective. And if the bone is healthy and the swelling is also healthy.
The corner of the swelling had gathered the meat inside and pressed it, so it was necessary to put a thin rod under the corner of the swelling that presses the meat and raise it up and cut that meat with it.
Place the remaining meat with burning, edible drugs until it all disappears, then treat it with caustics until it heals. If the corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it; for a corrupt bone will not heal if there remains any rotten matter in it.
If you see eating and corruption in the fingernail, cut it off at one of the joints as soon as it is mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the toe is injured and there occurs a severe pain, it is necessary to remove the cause first.
Then, pierce the toe with a sharp instrument at an angle from above to below and be careful not to reach the flesh beneath the toe, for doing so will cause severe pain and may lead to the growth of extra flesh in the area. Then treat the area with what cures wounds.
If an excessive fingernail grows in some people, it may not be entirely flesh, or there may be bone in some of them and also a toe in others, and it may grow in one nail separate from the others.
The plant may be found in some of the palms of the fingers and the one that grows in some of the palms of the fingers does not move, and it may grow near the joints of the fingers, possibly moving; if it is only a painful (one), cut it easily, and this is when you cut it at its root with a sharp blade.
As for the one whose plant is in the joint, its treatment is difficult and it requires excision, and as for the one that grows in one of the palms of the fingers, it should be cut first to the flesh then spread the bone with one of those suitable saws.
Then treat it until it heals, and as for the swelling that occurs in some of the fingers, it often happens and may be caused by injury or burn with fire and similar things; it is necessary to break this swelling.
Until the fingers return to their natural position, then put them between each other with a bandage soaked in olive oil or an ointment so that they do not swell quickly and separate from each other, or make a narrow strip of lead sheet between them until the situation heals as desired.
And similarly, when the incision is made for some fingers at the wrist, it should be cut according to what suits and heals the shape of the limb.
And likewise, when making an incision for some fingers at the wrist, it should be cut according to what is suitable and heals the shape of the limb.
When making a cut (for some fingers) at the wrist: it should be cut according to what suits and heals the shape of the limb.
The incision (dowaali) refers to the deep cuts made in various parts of the body, particularly common in fingers and toes, especially in the fingertips, nails, and joints. In these areas, it is advisable to initially use strong black linen for stitching.
Then take the patient's basilique (a type of surgical instrument), and as for treating it with iron, one should strike it until blood is drawn and a black spot appears, while the other should smooth the cut and draw out the sutures. If the incision was made in this manner, the finger should first be immersed in hot water.
Let the dark blood coagulate, then press the swollen finger from above and grasp it with a pincer, followed by making the cut in one place or in two or three places, making sure the incision is wide.
Then, allow the black blood to flow from below the scrotum to above and from above to below until it is expelled from the blood vessel that you can see clearly or as much as your strength allows, then tie it and order it to abstain from food associated with the dark menstruation. It recovers (or heals) and returns.
When the veins are filled and caused by the cause, as for the bleeding it should be of this nature to castrate the affected scrotum if there is much hair on it, then immerse it in hot water until it turns red and the vein bursts or endures strong exercise.
If the hot water is not brought to him until the limb cools, then cut the skin around the vein lengthwise either at its end during riding or at its bottom during sitting, then open the skin with scissors and squeeze the vein from all sides until it is visible to the touch.
When it becomes red, it appears reddish brown and if detached from the skin it looks like water, then a leech is inserted under it until it swells and comes out of the skin, then it is tied with coarse thread, then cut around it slightly near that place with a knife, as much as three fingers width.
Then incise the skin from above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the scissors as you did first and attach it to another snare as you did initially, then make a second or multiple cuts if necessary.
Then draw it out and cut at the end of the first incision near the joint, then pull it back until it comes out from the second incision, then pull it to the incision above it and repeat this process until all the incisions are drawn out, then cut them all.
If you do not need to draw it out and pull, insert a strong thread through the incision and tie it, then pull the thread and insert the scissors under it and cut in all directions until it comes out and keep it so that it does not break as if broken it will make it difficult for you to pull it.
The wound caused by it is harmful, so if you pull all of it, place it in the surgical site with bandaged cotton soaked in oil or fat and treat it until it heals, as the pain will be intense in the affected areas.
If it is not in a straight line as we mentioned, you should make cuts at each of the affected areas and the sites of the wounds, then tie it with snare until you pull all of it, and keep in mind that you must not cut the vein or injure it as this will make it difficult for you to pull it, thus saving your effort.
Figure of the incision for lithotomy (removing bladder stone).
Figure of the silver snare (for nosebleed control).
The cautery should not be sharp-tipped so as not to injure the brain and make the incision hard, but it should have a slight curvature as we have said; its point should not be sharp enough to cut through the brain, but rather it should have some advantage in being curved.
The First and Fortieth Chapter.
On the Incision of the City Vein (a vein in the brain).
This vein arises in the hot countries such as Hijaz, Arab lands and the few cold countries that have little snow, and it may also arise in other parts of the body apart from the sinews; it originates from an ulcer occurring beneath the skin.
As in the case of internal abscesses, buboes and boils that originate between the skin and flesh, a sign indicating the occurrence of this vein is that it occurs in the sinew and burns severely, then the place swells up; then the vein begins to issue from that swollen spot.
It is as if it were the root of a plant or animal; when its tip appears, it is necessary to apply a small piece of lead weighing a dirhem and a half to two dirhems and tie it up, leaving the lead attached to the sinew.
Whenever something comes out of it (the body) to the outside, tie it with thread in copper wire; if it is long, cut part of it and leave the rest, do not cut it from its root before everything has come out because if you cut it, it will become short, enter into the flesh, causing inflammation, swelling, pain at the site, and abscesses.
Therefore, it is advisable to gently draw and apply slight pressure until it comes out completely from the end and nothing remains in the body; it may come out from this abscess in some people up to a length of five or ten threads.
It has been reported to me that an abscess of twenty threads came out from a man; if it is cut while treating you, pus will enter into the wound and it will swell up for a long time with the body until everything inside it dissolves and try to drain the site with medications for several days.
Then, treat it with treatment for boils; this abscess may have many stalks and if it appears in the groin or on the man himself, it will produce numerous openings and come out from each stalk. It should be treated as we mentioned in the chapter and progressively.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
In the incision on the umbilical hernia that occurs beneath the abdomen, it is called the Al-Bakar ulcer.
This disease is called Al-Bakar ulcer in some countries because it often affects cattle, and it is a small, single hernia occurring between the skin and flesh that protrudes into the body vertically and horizontally.
It becomes apparent to the touch when probed from one limb to another until it pierces, where it has not pierced in the skin yet, and it protrudes as an abscess with some pus, as it is susceptible to hernia and worms in the abdomen.
It is expected from the disease that if it protrudes into the body and reaches the head, or reaches the eye, it will likely not open and discharge, causing the eye to be spoiled. In this case, if you want to treat it and remove it, it can only be done by probing it and its appearance to touch.
It is necessary to tighten what is above and below it with strong cords, then make an incision on it and remove it. If it has sunken into the flesh without being found, carry fire to the spot until it burns it, and enlarge its expected damage to the eye as we mentioned earlier.
If you see it (the boil) having appeared on the head close to the eye, press under it firmly and then cut it open and remove it. It is advisable for the patient to cleanse his body with easy-to-mix medicines for putrid ulcers and preserve foods conducive to healing.
The third section of chapter ten.
In the opening (incision) on the disease known as the Nafr.
This disease called Nafr in our land is a dislocation that appears in some parts of the body, then moves from one part to another and you may have seen it as described for you.
Call to a female slave in one of the gardens, I opened her arm and blew gently into its vein, then after an hour you will see that gas bubbling up like milk rises to its source as quickly as possible, similar to quicksilver.
If a dislocation occurs from one place to another, the pain remains in that location and settles in the joint, then after an hour it will spread throughout the body until it reaches the other arm, then I made her rotate her entire body as you saw.
I am amazed at the speed of its transfer from one member to another, and I had not seen this disease in this way on this characteristic except that I saw a group finding pain that transfers from one member to another, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
I was unable to accomplish this except that the woman belonged to the nobility, her body being hollow and veins visible; hence, the transferred wind appeared in feeling, but it should not appear on this scale among the sick or those with moist, hidden veins.
If you want to treat it and the owner feels pain, if it appears to you as we described, then press firmly on it and pierce it with a lancet until the trapped wind comes out and stops in that place.
If you do not see it with your eyes, treat it by drawing out the flesh and expelling the winds like mustard plaster and similar medications.
The fourth and fortieth section.
On the extraction of the sutures (or stitches).
Stitches (sutures) may vary according to their types and the places in the body where they are located, and as for their differences according to their types, some are large or small, some are upright glass or closed glasses, and some have three corners while others have four.
From it are those parts which have a tongue, and as for the ones which do not have teeth, the one that is in the limbs where the joints reside will be on joints; whether the limbs are those of the head such as the skull, heart, liver, neck, both testicles, uterus, bladder, and similar ones. When a tumor occurs in one of these parts and symptoms of death appear to you, I will describe them to you later; it is necessary to avoid extracting that tumor from it, for death usually happens to its owner in most cases. When these symptoms do not appear to you and the tumor is movable in the cavity of the limb, extract it and treat the wound; from the signs of the skull: if a tumor occurs and bone breaks out and fractures the nasal bone which is on the skull, then one should be aware that it may cause severe pain, swelling, and fever.
When these symptoms do not appear to you and the tumor is movable in the cavity of the limb, extract it and treat the wound; from the signs of the skull: if a tumor occurs and bone breaks out and fractures the nasal bone which is on the skull, then one should be aware that it may cause severe pain, swelling, and fever. Redness in the eyes and tongue swelling, confusion of mind, seizures, and possibly bleeding from the nostrils or ears and loss of speech and sound, followed by pus-like yellow discharge coming from the wound site; it is like a boil and fluid similar to raw meat will flow from it.
If these symptoms appear to you, refrain from treating the underlying cause and removing the foreign body if it does not come out, and as for the signs of a foreign body: if it is located in the heart and is close to the left shoulder, feel it as though it has become encapsulated in something hard, not in something hollow.
Perhaps the foreign body shows movement resembling a pulse and dark blood oozes from the wound, followed by coldness of the sides and cold sweat and bluish discoloration, then know that death is imminent, with no hope of recovery. A sign of a foreign body is if the head is injured and bluish white blood flows from the wound.
When the neck is affected, its color changes and it breathes heavily and demands cold air, then if a foreign body covers the chest, it will be close to small openings and breathing will be very difficult with severe pain.
The entire abdomen is swollen and moves, if a foreign body reaches the liver it follows with severe pain and blood similar to that of the liver comes from the wound, and if a foreign body reaches the spleen perhaps food other than it will come out from the wound.
The case is apparent when there is a hernia in the abdomen and blood appears within it, and something has emerged from the incision or wound or fistula; there is no doubt about treatment for such a condition, nor for removing the hernia. If the hernia occurs in the bladder and urine comes out.
If something emerges from a wound and the pain increases significantly, it indicates that the limb is dying. As for the rest of the body parts such as face, eyes, neck, chest, back, thighs, legs, feet, and everything similar to them; they will submit to the condition more easily.
If a hernia does not cause swelling or pain, and the hernia is not poisoned; I will inform you of some cases of this type of hernias so that you can rely on them for your treatment. This includes a hernia that occurred in the eye socket of a man near the nasal cavity.
I removed it from the other side beneath the eardrum and he was cured, and there was no harm to his eye. I also removed a hernia from a Jew who had it under his lower eyelid; the hernia had twisted but nothing else adhered to it except its smaller side which stuck to the bone.
The tumor was large, composed of the compound iron mass without ears. A Jew extracted it, and no ill event happened in his eye. The tumor was later extracted from a Christian, and the tumor was Arabic.
He had ears, and they were severed between the Jews. It had been swallowed in his throat, so he was treated until it was extracted, and a Christian received it and was safe. Later, a tumor was extracted from a man who had it in his abdomen; we expected him to die from it.
After remaining for about thirty days and nothing changed in his condition, they severed the tumor and it transformed into another substance and was extracted, and he was safe, and no ill event happened to him. I saw a man with a tumor on his chest, and the wound was inflicted upon him.
After seven years, the tumor came out in its original form as a hand. I saw a woman who had a tumor in her abdomen that was a tumor and the wound was inflicted upon her. The tumor remained and nothing changed in her condition or any danger was found for her in anything of her natural actions.
You see a man whose cheek is swollen and the wound bleeding, yet he feels little pain. Similar cases are many. I extracted a tooth from a man among the leaders of the ruler, who had it situated in the middle of his left nostril slightly.
I extracted the entire tooth after three days, then searched for the wound which was very tight. I probed it with a thin wire and did not feel anything, but he complained of pain and swelling below his right ear.
I hoped that the pain was from the tooth, so I pressed gently on the spot with my fingers. It produced a strong attraction and he winced slightly as if indicating the tooth had reached the spot. However, no event occurred that would indicate the tooth had passed through the spot. This suggests the tooth has not yet reached its position.
I pressed the wound with a pledget for several days, but no event occurred during that time. The pain subsided over the course of extracting the tooth and he remained calm until I felt the tooth inside his nose one day. I informed him and applied a sharp, edible medicine to the wound for several days.
Until it opens and its edge is felt, then the delicate hook that adheres to wood is sensed, then pressure was applied in the incision with that sharp drug until the edge of the splinter appeared to us by the eyes, and it stayed for a period of time similar to four months.
Then, when the wound expands and allows the forceps to enter it, they attract it and move it, but it did not respond to extraction. I did not forcefully remove it, but I tortured it with tools until a strong pair of forceps caught hold of it according to its appearance in this last section.
The physicians ruled that the neck of an ulcer should not be pressed, but I pressed it and compressed the wound and forced the abscess to burst violently without any harm to the patient, and I inform you about the method of extracting some splinters for this purpose to serve as a measure and indication of what I did not mention.
Because these parts of this craft and their details cannot be described or fully explained in a book, the skilled craftsman must gauge much with little, and what is apparent to him is what was missing, and he devises new works and new tools during unusual circumstances.
If you depart from this craft, I say that the wound only comes out of the parts where it has erupted in two ways, either by attraction to the place from which you entered or by confrontation with the opposite side, and it comes out through the place where you entered.
Either the wound is deep and located in a muscle, where it attracts and comes out; if it does not require immediate exit, you should wait for the surrounding meat to soften, making its removal and extraction easier, and this also applies if it occurs in bone.
You should also leave it for days and keep applying pressure and moving it every day, as it will come out; if it does not need to be extracted after days, you must drill around the wound in the same bone from all sides with a light chisel until it widens, then attract and extract it.
If the wound occurs in the bone of the skull and shows some of the symptoms that I have mentioned to you, grasp the wound and leave it until the matter resolves after several days.
Apply for the extraction of thorn or splinter, if it is deep and you are not able to draw it out, then use tweezers around the thorn as I have described to you, then treat the site until it heals; but if the thorn has worked its way into a body part. Feel for the pain and probe it with a probe, if you feel it then draw it out using some tools that are suitable for drawing it out; but if you cannot do so due to narrowness of the wound or deep location of the splinter and it is not bone, nerve, or vein.
Break it open until the wound expands and the splinter becomes accessible to be extracted; but if it has roots that hold onto them, remove the surrounding flesh from all sides with every method you can possibly use and then draw it out; but if you are unable to remove the flesh in breaking the roots, break the roots and separate them, then pull them apart until they come loose.
When trying to extract a splinter in any location, use tweezers on all sides until it comes loose and secure the tip of the probe so as not to break the splinter while trying to draw it out; but if you are unable to do so at your convenience.
Leave it for certain days until the affected meat heals, then resume treatment. If it resists, use the methods of treatment mentioned in the relevant section and preserve your effort from cutting veins or nerves or arteries and apply caution.
In any case, you can remove the thorn and this should be done with a clean hand and you should firmly grip it until you pull it out in its original shape as it was when the thorn pierced it, for this is more appropriate.
If you cannot do that, use whatever is possible for you in terms of methods. As for the thorn that comes out from the opposite side, it may either have come out with something outside or you find one edge of the thorn touching the skin from above and you see it protruding.
Break it as much as possible for the fracture to extend up to five knuckles, then pull it gently as this facilitates its removal. If it is lodged in bone, strike your hand on it repeatedly until the thorn moves in the bone and widens itself, then pull it.
If this is not possible, leave it for days until it comes out on its own. If the thorn returns, push it with a probe. If the probe has fallen and you intend to use it again, insert the straight instrument into the opening made by the probe, then push it with it.
If the foreign body is erect, push it back with a device that enters into this incision; for the foreign body will ease its exit in this manner. If the foreign body is diseased, it is necessary to cauterize all the meat surrounding it if possible, then treat it as appropriate.
If the foreign body is present in the chest, abdomen, liver, or flank and is near to what can be grasped with a hook, and you are able to incise it, then incise it and preserve from cutting vessels or nerves and remove it.
Then mark the wound if stitching is required, then treat it until it heals, the picture of the magnets which attract foreign bodies:.
The sides of it should be similar to the wings of a bird, made to resemble a magnet if it attracts a foreign body or something left behind, and they can be made in various sizes, large, small, or medium depending on the size and weight of the foreign body and the size and depth of the wound.
Picture of the long forceps:.
Picture of the crushed forceps:.
This is a crushed side similar to the tip, used to ease entry of the erect foreign body and remove it.
Fifth and Forty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Tying of Arteries.
On the Tying of Arteries. The arteries that are accustomed to be tied in the body, there are thirty arteries among them in the head, sixteen arteries known as the pulsing ones located behind the well-known ears (the carotids) and the four arteries in the visible temples (the temporal arteries), and the two known arteries in the prominent eyes (the ophthalmic arteries).
And the tied artery in the middle of the neck, and the artery on the side of the nose, and the two arteries in the upper eye socket, and the two arteries in the lower eye socket; these are the known arteries referred to as jugulars and those under the tongue.
As for the arteries that are tied in the arm and hand, they are five, one of them is the brachial (artery) which is from the venomous side and is commonly known as the head artery, and the radial (artery) which is central and is composed of branches from the basilic and the brachial, and is commonly known as the body artery.
The basilic (artery) is on the venomous side and is also called the spinal, and it is commonly known as the abdomen artery and the brachial vein, which lies under the arm and is tied there, appears above the elbow clearly, and is also called the tendon.
This is the artery that lies between the femoral and popliteal, it has two branches; one of them is beneath the knee cap from the wild side [i.e., outside], the second one is the scrotal and its place is near the heel from the human side [i.e., inside], and the female artery and its place is near the ankle from the wild side.
In the other leg, there are three arteries similar to it; as for the two arteries behind the ears, they are beneficial if tied for treating fistulas and abscesses and swellings of the head, especially the pulsating ones. The method is described below.
It is to cut the small artery at the elbow and then tie it loosely in a place where the two arteries are behind the ears with a coarse thread. Then, tighten the elbow joint with a tourniquet until the two arteries appear behind the ears in their depressed positions on the head. Feel them with your fingers to sense their pulsation under your fingers. Wherever you feel their pulse, that is where the tie should be made for instruction on tying.
Then, take a thin cannula, which is known as the needle, and insert it under the artery in the skin until it reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the artery and skin above and cut the artery along with the skin with a swift cut such that the length of the cut is about two fingers pressed together.
And take as much blood as you desire, then let it coagulate with the cautery and leave it until it escapes, for at the beginning of the book, they have been cut and separated. As for the varicose veins in the eyelids, it is beneficial to remove them for difficult cataract, persistent bleedings and ulcers directed towards the eyes.
The method of removing them is as follows: make the patient's hand warm with a heating agent until the veins appear clearly on the back of the hand, and then it will be easy to feel their pulsations. Once they are felt, learn where to cut them by feeling the surrounding area. Then raise the skin from above the vein up to the point you reached with your finger.
Insert the lancet under the vein and raise it to above, just as you did with other veins. Send blood according to your need, then dissolve the coagulum around the vein and place your finger on the vein for a minute.
Then place a bandage over it and press down firmly for a while, until it stops bleeding. They have already been mentioned, cut and tied in the beginning of the book. As for removing veins on the forehead, it is beneficial after removing the temple veins to relieve facial swellings such as abscesses, boils, and bruises.
"Method of drawing out a foreign body that has penetrated deeply, so that it appears; then take the instrument known as 'the forceps', and this is its image:" (This is a literal translation, please note that a more idiomatic translation might be different).
"Place the pointed end of the forceps on the foreign body and strike it from above with a blow or something similar, then let blood flow as much as desired; then release the forceps grip and pull gently until it comes out.
"It can be opened with a wide handle, but it should not be too narrow, for the handle should not be sharp like other forceps; rather, it should be slightly rounded so that it can be twisted when the bone is close, for fear that the forceps might break if it were too thin.
"As for the eyelids, which are two in number and are useful against the eye from irritation, redness, swelling, and facial diseases; and as for the method of drawing them out, it is to press the foreign body on its edge with a forceps then twist them and you remain on their head, and the pulling should be done by twisting in a slight rotational movement using a small handle.
"For a wound without muscle, if the handle is sharp, it might break; so send for blood as needed and place a dressing on them and press them for one night then release them; as for pulling the eyelid, it helps with painful swelling.
A strong headache, one of the diseases of the face, is like a red swelling that appears in the nose, especially if it's enlarged. Its treatment is to press its root firmly, then grab the nose with your left hand and take a thin and long forceps.
Pierce it in the center of the nostril, using the same instrument for gripping the nose on a steady hold, as nerves are not felt there, thus blood will flow from its artery. It is necessary to grip it slightly with your hand and send some blood, then tie it up at night; it will quickly constrict.
As for the boils, it is beneficial to treat them for suffocation and to start the bleeding and the sores that appear on the skin such as blackheads, carbuncles, pustules, and abscesses. Its treatment is to press its base under them with a band and let the maker stand on its tip.
The instrument is placed on a chair, then the nerve is stretched as far as possible and widened slightly, then an appropriate amount of blood is let out, or according to what seems necessary for that. Then it is done the same with the other nerve, then the band is undone.
The arteries should be tied firmly in the middle so that they are not cut, and left for later because it helps in healing the wound. As for the arteries of the neck, it is beneficial to tie them after tying the carotids because it benefits the brain in the mouth, decay of the gums, red bleeding from the eyes, and fractures of the eyelids.
To tie the arteries in the face and around it, first have your assistant stand in front of you and press his back against yours. Then turn your eyes to the arteries, one on the right side of the eye and the other on the left, and follow them with your fingers.
The same also applies to tying the arteries that are red and pulsating, which you should cut off immediately if they resemble one another, because if you are uncertain about them, cut off the larger one first and then tie the other as well. This is done in the lower eyelids.
As for the arteries under the tongue, it is beneficial to tie them after tying the carotids, for the use of these ligatures in diseases of the throat and mouth. The way to do this is to have your assistant sit between your legs with his head facing the sun, raise his tongue, and look below it on one side for an artery and on the other side for another. Both will turn red.
Extract and preserve them (the three veins) so that they are not cut, for beneath them lie nerves. However, if nerves are exposed from the extracted veins, then it is likely a blood vessel from those nerves will be visible. As for the three veins found in the arm, it is customary to extract them in two places.
Arm artery can be exposed by incising Rihan or Zaitun vein to the wrist, or by making a cut in the Sekkina vein, which is known as the Nishl (these are its images). Image of the wide Rihan arm artery:.
When it is opened as you see, it suits the incision of clogged veins filled with hardened blood that appear reddish and contain thick blood, and this is an image of the Zaitun arm artery:.
This artery is narrower and sharper at both ends, it suits the extraction of thin veins that contain thin, pale blood, and this is an image of the Nishl arm artery:.
This Nishl, which is suitable for incision, comes in various forms and thicknesses depending on the size and tightness of the veins, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three main veins, it is beneficial to locate it as it draws blood from the areas under the arm and neck, up to the chest and abdomen. It is important for the one who locates it to be careful and keep an eye on it; because beneath it are nerves. If he makes a mistake or adds in the incision of the back, that nerve will be cut.
In case of bleeding, it is important that the basilic vein is not incised in the back but should be located with a probe. If it does not appear clearly on the surface, it is necessary to avoid it and look for another vein or ask for assistance from one of the veins' branches.
If you want to locate the basilic vein, it should be done by feeling the arm until the position of pulsation is known. Then, learn its location by palpation before making an incision.
Then tie the arm and make an incision on the vein with a probe as previously mentioned, ensuring that the blow is at a distance from the nerves. When you feel a swelling in the location you learned by palpation, that swelling is the nerve. Avoid it.
If you see blood during a cut, it gushes out like a young boy's urine, and if the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from an artery. At that point, press for a while with your finger, then remove your finger. If the blood continues to flow greatly, it indicates that the bone has been broken.
Leave it and warn the patient not to move it for a while until it becomes stable, unless blood continues to flow excessively or you are unable to press on it at the time, in which case administer medicines for it. If the wound gapes open, know that its edges will contract and the blood will cease to flow.
Take a piece of bone, split it and press the half onto the wound tightly with ligatures and bind it for as many days as necessary, unless blood continues to flow. In that case, treat it according to the position of the ligature used for tying off the vein, and cut the blood vessel if not too difficult in most cases.
For small wounds where ligature can be used in the bone, know it. As for the vein that bleeds heavily, it is beneficial to tie it off so as to attract blood from the head and abdomen because it consists of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, as we mentioned earlier.
It is necessary for the leech to be on the back of the one who is being bled, because beneath it there are nerves. If more is added to the incision and it strikes the nerve, a mishap occurs in which pus forms that makes breathing difficult and perhaps does not pass easily; this nerve often appears to touch.
If it [the leech] is hidden in some people and is thin and not easily detected, it is necessary to make an incision for the bleeding in a spot where the nerve is avoided, since if there is an artery between two nerves, an incision should be made lengthwise. As for the arterial nerve, it is beneficial to bleed it because it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases, and specifically in this artery, if you want to bleed it; a nick should be made with the zest incision or the broad incision of cinnamon because it relaxes all the veins since there are no nerves nor arteries beneath it.
Except that, when bleeding, you should avoid the head of the humerus bone and seek a smooth location; it does not harm him if he is not hit with the first blow, but only if he does not bleed in the first attempt. However, in some people, if he is not bled in the first blow, he may experience pain.
But that worm does not harm him at all, as for the method of excision and its consequences, and what should be done before treating it, first it is necessary to know that excision can either be used for preserving health only.
If it is to be used for diseases or if it is to be used for preserving health and maintaining it, as well as preventing diseases, excision should be in one of the three veins located in the arm, namely the cephalic, basilic, and medial cubital, and excision should be done at the beginning of spring when signs of congestion appear.
Excision should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after passing three hours of the day, and if excision is to be used for diseases, it does not have a specific time but whenever there is need or necessity, either during the night or day.
In every hour and at every time, it is not permissible to excise infants until they reach fourteen years of age, and it is not permissible to excise the elderly who have exceeded sixty years, for whoever needs excision for any reason whatsoever.
It is necessary to clean the wound before cutting, with a thin needle if there is much dirt in it, lest it attracts to the veins during incision of the wound which causes an abscess that harms the main limbs; neither the drunkard nor the leper nor the bleeding should be cut until [the state] has passed from them.
To avoid cutting also after coitus, urination, defecation, increased amount of blood, fatigue, exercise, intoxication, fasting, or anything that weakens the body or soul; then observe the clotting of blood before doing so if the blood is thick.
With food, drink, and medication if possible; then the bath can be taken unless prevented by something or he desires some exercise to make the blood flow and make cutting in the daytime as we said and to keep his heart clear of all harmful psychological factors.
Like anger, fear, anxiety, and all bodily factors such as fatigue, uneven pressure, bleeding, and similar things; a meeting of the necessary items that people usually resort to for relief and comfort such as perfumes, incense, oils, and similar things should be prepared for every person according to their ability.
Then, the patient sits on a stool that is higher than the one used for the amputation, then he removes his arm and the amputator moves it with his hand two or three times, then he ties the ligature using a shared knot and tightens it two or three times until it is even.
After the ligature is even, it is important to ensure that the amputated limb does not continue bleeding by applying pressure on it or by applying a tourniquet. After the ligature, it is necessary to move the amputated limb with both hands firmly together.
He should inflate the veins and make them visible to the touch, then he should rub the stump with olive oil specifically, then place his thumb from his left hand on the same vein in the location where he intends to amputate slightly so that it does not get damaged during the strike. Since water veins become damaged during amputation and those that are full of gas may sink under the stump and contract, it is important that when placing the amputated part on them, they are lowered and loosened and that the vein does not open and if it opens, it will only do so slightly.
Therefore, the wound should be firmly stitched and he must be careful in all these matters. Then, the patient is to lower himself, if the anus opens during this process, it is to be done again in the same position or slightly below or above with a probe, unless the area is inflamed.
If inflammation or pain occurs, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the stitches as it may cause severe pain and prevent bathing. Then, try to stitch again if desired. If the anus is slightly opened and blood flow is thin.
I fear that not all the required blood may come out, so reopen the anus in the same hole and stitch it carefully with a small opening and do this with a probe before the area becomes inflamed as many people can become inflamed during a small opening.
If you see him inflamed, do not press it as it will be of no help to you and place something from medicinal oil on it as it facilitates blood flow and is better in this situation than the oil itself or any other ointments.
Use oil ointment in all your incisions for bleeding, as it may stop the flow of blood. If applied, it will make the phlegm and pus disappear if placed on the spot; if it is thick, it will liquefy.
If there is a large swelling or abscess in the incision, it often occurs and especially for those who did not cauterize; except if the incision was small. In this case, apply a mustard poultice mixed with water and salt, wrap it slightly, leave it for an hour, as it will liquefy.
It should be done after the blood has completely left the incision, or from another incision; if it remains in its place for several days, and something of blackness or greenish appears, it will not harm that. If you prefer, apply some kind of pressure and a warm poultice to it.
Or some amount of fig syrup, and similar things; often a swelling or boil occurs when making an incision for the bladder. If you find it soft upon touching, leave it alone, as this is not good. Be careful to avoid applying anything that we have mentioned.
If blood from a vein leaks out, it should be compressed with something to solidify the area, then treated with other remedies until it heals. It is necessary for every human to drain an amount of blood according to his strength and what predominant color appears on the blood.
If the blood is black, let it drain until it turns red, likewise if you see it thick, send it until it becomes thin, and similarly if it's hard, continue to drain it until its hardness goes away. It is necessary for one who is strong and in need of bloodletting to perform it once.
To enlarge the vein, apply heat and make the affected area wide. If one is weak, he should avoid this method and it is necessary for him to drain it in intervals. The incision should be tight, and the best tool for bloodletting is a curved, thin, sharp instrument without any notches.
This strike for bloodletting is gentle and effective, and it's Ahmad or Aslam in terms of widening and lengthening the vein. If one habitually dislikes this method during bloodletting, it is necessary to give him some bread soaked in rosewater or skim milk before bloodletting.
If it is a wound and blood comes out of it three or four times, if it is cold in nature, he should take bread soaked in the syrup of honey or in the good syrup of mead with spices or in the good aromatic wine before suturing.
If bleeding occurs during suturing and its cause is excessive blood flow, it is necessary to apply warm water and aromatic wine with stimulants, and to use everything mentioned in the chapter on bleeding.
For one who wishes to anesthetize and relax his limb, and to dilute the blood slightly in a weak suturing, it is necessary for those who perform the suture when there is excessive bleeding with weak force, to dilute the blood slightly every day or two.
For one who wishes to anesthetize and relax his limb, and dilute the blood slightly in a strong suturing, it should be done on seven or nine hours after the first suture, and for one who intends to draw blood from inside the body towards the side that it was directed to, he must wait for the second or third day.
If there is much blood in the body, it may have fermented and produced pus. It is necessary to draw out all the blood at once and to draw out a large amount until the wound is exposed after being completely cleansed of all conditions for surgery. Put your hand on the wound when bleeding occurs to prevent death at the site of the incision, for it rarely happens if the surgeon is skilled and careful. However, do not attempt to stop the bleeding with a second pressure.
If the orifice of the vein is narrow and blood flow is obstructed, do not press on it with force or apply strong suction as this is very painful. Instead, either leave it until you ligate it a second time or cut off some of the blood in the vein with a scalpel.
Or apply salt dissolved in water or any kind of poultice, such as farruk or shikhznaiya, and gently press it until blood comes out. If the vein has become inflamed, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the pain subsides, for if the necessity arises to stop the bleeding a second time, either ligate it in that place or ligate it in another vein or another artery.
As for drawing the thread of a fracture, draw a splint from alkal and basil if they are not available or hidden as it is compounded from them. The method of drawing it is to insert the hand into hot water until the tendon turns red and the pulp appears clearly, then press gently but firmly on top of it with a rope.
Then draw out the pulp slightly without spreading or elongating it, and make the opening wide so that your splint fits over it but not tightly, for if bleeding occurs, place the hand in a hot water container to let the blood flow in the water.
Until your need is met, if you are in summer days, you may not return the hand to hot water and what helps blood to flow in hot water more during cold times, and draw this pulp gently from all tendons. Because there is no tendon or nerve under it, and as for drawing out the ulnar artery from the left hand, it is beneficial for alleviating the liver ailment, and the method of drawing it out is to press the wrist with a rope or your hand after putting it in hot water until the pulp swells.
Because there is no tendon or nerve under it, and as for drawing out the ulnar artery from the left hand, it is beneficial for alleviating the liver ailment, and the method of drawing it out is to press the wrist with a rope or your hand after putting it in hot water until the pulp swells. The rough flesh shall be made distinct, then it shall be scraped slightly even if the entire skin adheres to it; nothing bad happens as a result of this. Keep your hand away from the bone, for below it is the nerve of the fingers and the position is visible in the meat. Then return your hand to the hot water.
Leave it to bleed, if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in its wound and prevent flowing. If you remove enough blood, apply oil and salt on the wound so that it does not clot quickly.
It is necessary to do the same with each tight vein, and it is beneficial to scrape it from the left hand as it helps with varicose veins. Likewise, do the same for the right hand, and as for scraping the calf, it is useful for diseases in the abdomen such as hernias.
Touch the scrotum, kidney stones, and ulcers in the feet and legs with diseases similar to them, and the method of scraping is for a man to immerse his leg in hot water and grasp it with a clamp until the veins are felt, then press firmly above the division of the leg where the scrotum is visible like an earlobe.
From it on the face of the man, a large number of hairs grow. Remove them from a larger area or near the navel in the public area. This is best and more hygienic. If you remove them from the face of the man, preserve the limbs underneath the facial skin on the face of the man.
Make your removal (of hairs) curved as if you are plucking with tweezers, and let the nipple become flat. If there is difficulty in blood flow, let him dip his arm in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it subsides, unless he makes a mistake in plucking the armpit during the first attempt.
Let the removal (of hairs) be done a little above, as it is safe and does not harm the limb as we mentioned earlier, and likewise perform it on other parts of the man's body, and regarding the armpit of women, its location should be as we said near the underarm from the side facing away from the animal.
It is beneficial to remove the boil if it is caused by hot blood, and the method of removal should be by using a small-handled heated metal instrument, and it should enter from the side of the boil, near the navel, with four fingers holding the instrument with a pointed, long, sharp hook. It will not appear except with this.
If it appears, seize it in whatever state you are, either on its twist or it is better, or break it with a lever or crush it by crushing, for its place is safe. It usually remains hidden and therefore, if you do not find it.
If the stone does not appear to the touch, seize one of its parts which appears on the sole of the foot near the heel and the ball, and save it from diseases and send for the amount of blood you desire.
Then release the grip, place cotton at the seized location and tighten it again, for it will quickly heal.
Chapter Six and Seventy.
In the procedure of ligation and how it is used.
The ligatures may be of silk, wood, copper, or glass, and ligation can be done in two ways: one is the ligature under tension (ligature with traction) and draining of blood, and the other is the non-tension ligature (ligature without traction).
This non-tension ligation can be done in two ways.
Incisions for the wrists (both from the backside), incision for the neck, incision for the jaw (beneath the lower jaw below the mouth), incisions for the armpits, incisions along the elbow joint, incisions for the fingers, and incisions for the toes.
Drawing blood from the veins protruding in the flesh is necessary to prevent loss of strength and collapse, so it is not recommended to make an incision with fire or without fire for any of the diseases that are due to congestion until the body has completely emptied itself.
When the need arises for incision due to a disease or for routine, we have used it at all times in the beginning of the month, in the end of the month, in the middle and at any time.
And among the people, there are some whose blood increases so much that they need to have it drawn by incision, and among them are those who find redness and swelling on their face and head and nape, and among them are those who have eruptions on their face and lesions and blindness and cataracts in their eyes, and among them is one who has a misplaced incision site.
Among them are those who laugh a lot, among them are those who taste blood in their mouth and it makes them shiver, and among them is the blood that gushes out and among them are those who sleep a lot and see blood and redness and killings and surgeries and similar things, so when have we seen something like this?
Specifically, it has been prescribed for us in the middle third of the month to perform cupping after two or three hours of the day, and as for the benefit of cupping a vein, it is beneficial for relieving headache and water accumulating near the eyes.
But it should be done after emptying the abdomen, and this cupping may help with evacuating feces. It is also important to note that it should not be performed if the patient has a cold head or is experiencing fever, as it can cause severe harm.
Therefore, it should not be performed by the elderly or those who have head diseases, and those who suffer from amnesia after undergoing cupping.
Therefore, it is advisable for the person performing cupping to apply gentle pressure downwards slightly to avoid causing amnesia, and as for cupping of the skull, it is beneficial for evacuating pus and abscesses.
Therefore, it is beneficial to use the cautery and tightening of the chest, the respirator, stimulation, and filling [of wounds]. It is necessary that the opening of the ribcage be slightly raised as it, if pushed downwards, would produce weakness in the heart and digestive system.
As for the fractures of the skull, jaw, nasal bone, cheekbone and lower jaw, it is beneficial to make incisions at the sites of injury. It is necessary that the person performing the incision not press deeply so as not to sever any nerves, lest bleeding occur.
As for incisions under the tongue, it is beneficial to make cuts in the mouth and treat ailments of the mouth such as canker sores, and a person may be placed to drain abscesses that are in the armpits, and regarding incisions on the shoulders, it is beneficial to open boils resulting from swelling and heat.
As for incisions on the abdomen of the testicles, it is beneficial to make incisions that will draw blood from all the soft veins in the flesh as these soft veins are connected to each other and will draw blood until it reaches the three strong veins.
The procedure should be commanded such that it does not occur in a condition where the location is visible from the flesh and there are veins and arteries beneath, but as for the single person being amputated on account of an ulcer or abscess, it will be beneficial to the sores below.
The procedure should be commanded such that the amputation is large and made of copper, as the location requires a strong suture and perhaps the amputation glass may break, hence there are many conditions to consider. As for amputations of veins, it weakens the filling in a significant manner.
As it attracts blood from the entire body and is beneficial for sores in the kidneys, bladder, uterus, and intestines, and it stimulates ovulation and is beneficial for cysts and tumors. It also straightens the spinal cord and cervical vertebrae, except that it weakens the body significantly and occurs commonly in people, and amputations of cervical vertebrae are nearly as beneficial as amputations of veins.
The method of placement of the amputations is such that the amputation should be placed empty and sutured with a balanced suture and not too long. However, you place it quickly and remove it quickly to accept the mixture evenly and do not stop until you see the location turning red and opening.
Blood appeared, then it stops and the patient vomits repeatedly. Then observe the abdomen. If one of the people is affected, let the meat be removed cautiously, piece by piece, so that only one piece should be grasped at a time to avoid worsening the situation.
The ligators should widen the grasp and delve slightly, moving gently. If there is a clot in the blood, it should be grasped twice; in the first instance, open a passage for the blood and drainage, and in the second instance, do not extract the clotted blood itself.
If the blood is extremely thick, grasp it a third time to reach the goal. In general, if we wish to extract little blood, one grasp is enough; but if we wish to remove much blood, we need more grasps, and even if we are able to extract clotted blood.
A deep grasp should be used, and the limit of the grasp should only reach the skin, not any instrument or water, or what is harmful to the ligated one; if his flesh was thick, hard, rough and tight.
It is necessary to anoint the sites of incisions with open, fragrant ointments such as alkiri, balsam of Peru or sweet almond oil or honey and camomile ointment. If it is in summer time, use similar ointments like alkiri or balsam of Peru or sweet almond oil or honey and camomile ointment.
If it is in winter time, use similar ointments like castor oil or olive oil or almond oil or lard and suchlike. If the cold is thick and hard, let the ointment be warm oil of roses or oil of nutmeg or linseed oil or oil of sesame and suchlike.
If the incision is wide and deep, cutting into flesh, it is necessary to abstain from anointing and those who have such incisions should wash them after being sutured with water or cold water or water of sour grapes or camomile water or vinegar water or similar. As for one whose blood is much in moisture.
He should wash his incisions with salt water or cow urine and similar, and as for one whose wound is thick, he should wash it with strong drink or oil of roses or linseed oil or almond oil and similar, and caution should be taken in suturing in the bath and after the bath.
It is advisable to wait for an hour or two after leaving the bath, and no one should sleep after suturing. The patient and the one who cuts (the wound) should not converse before suturing and after it.
If the patient or the one who cuts (the wound) is pale and there is bleeding and inflammation, it is advisable to take the mustard seeds, poppy seeds, salt, dried coriander, and other similar items and make a paste from them. The fried fish (or chicken) parts, lamb innards, and other similar foods should be added to this paste.
If the patient's complexion is cold, it is advisable to give honey water or poppy seeds with pepper and drink mild oil in between old and new, and he should be advised to eat sparingly. The food for this day should be fish (or chicken) parts, cucumbers, parrots, and the white parts of the bathhouse eggs. It is also advisable that the drink should be more than the food on the day of suturing and dressing.
In some cases, it may be advisable to give the patient the sedative Faluroq or the drug Musk or Shilthas before suturing and dressing, or after them, to strengthen the main vessels and stimulate blood circulation. It is not advisable to give these substances to those who are bleeding excessively.
As for the wounds that occur without a precondition, they are the wounds that occur on the liver, spleen, kidneys, stomach, intestines, and bladder, as well as their vicinity, because these parts do not bear a condition upon them, and all they seek is to draw blood from one part to another.
We place a wound on the kidneys to alleviate pain or we use it to release cold air from the body, as there is swelling in the part. Similarly, we place a wound on the stomach and bladder because it ruptures the part and causes heat, and releases wind to relieve it. That's the role of the released air.
If there is a stone or gravel in the kidneys, we place pressure on it with the intention of either opening the stone or expelling the gravel from its position. Similarly, if wind gathers in the liver and spleen, placing a wound in them can help dispel that wind. These wounds are sometimes made empty with just a needle.
We use fire and a container filled with boiling water in the treatment of fistulas, because filling the wound with hot or boiling water makes it large, which facilitates the treatment.
Then, place the patient on the location and hold it, and repeat as necessary according to need, and this is the image of the amputated (limb) that is used with fire.
A pouch should be made with two openings, each about half a finger's depth deep, and on its side, there should be a small hole for the probe to fit in. It should be made of Chinese brass or yellow thick copper.
A flat, leveled pouch should be made so as not to harm the limb when placed on it, and in its center, a resistant probe made of copper or iron should be placed where the fat is put when heated with fire. This amputator can be made larger than what was previously described, or smaller according to the nature of the ailment.
The method of using this amputator is that the amputators for boys and girls are not used for men or the female sex, and as for how to place this amputator in fire on the limb, it should be heated with a rod or small shovel made of iron or clay, and it should be placed on the center of the erect penis that is inside the amputator.
The fire should rise towards the bottom, almost beneath the amputator to prevent burning the patient, then it is placed on the limb and the finger is placed on the hole that was previously mentioned until we grasp the amputator without needing to exert force, at which point we remove the finger.
The boil came out on that hole, and the incision was closed at the site, then the cautery was applied to the scar if necessary. However, for the boil used in scrofula with water, there is no probe or hole.
It is used by filling it with water and placing it only on the limb, as shown in this image:.
This boil, when it was large, held a lot of water; in this case, four to six cups of water was better.
The Seventy-Ninth Chapter.
On the Ligation of the Artery.
The ligature is mainly used in most cases where it is not possible to place an incision, either because of their small size such as the eyelid and vulva or because the limb is visible from the meat such as fingers, nose and surrounding areas.
Its application is to obtain a thin ligature made of clean water from the vinegar, then leave it for one or two days in brine until it ferments and there is nothing left inside it. Then the body is drained first by cupping or incision, then the affected limb is scraped.
Until it turns red, then place it on him. If it sticks, let it fall and if possible, cauterize the spot with a heated iron. Otherwise, wash the spot with lime, then with plenty of water, soap, and salt. If bleeding continues after falling of the piece (of flesh), apply a cold kernal of corn in water.
Place it on top of the wound until bleeding stops. If blood continues to flow, apply powdered pigeon droppings or something similar from the cinnabar on the wound until bleeding stops or put vinegar on the spot.
Leave it on the wound until the skin sticks to the spot and bleeding stops. If another piece of flesh is required, do not use that one if possible; otherwise, clean the spot with donkey blood.
Thread a needle and insert it into the wound until something from the blood comes out, then place (the needle) so that if you want it to fall off, sprinkle something of soap, salt or ashes on it; it will fall onto the spot.
Chapter Three.
In Algebra.
This chapter also includes techniques needed in the practice of medicine, which is broken algebra of fracture and setting of bones that have been displaced.
Know, oh sons, that this chapter may be called ignorant by doctors and the common people who have not delved into books of the foot or read a letter from them.
For this purpose, this craft has become unknown in our land, and I have not found anyone with a good teacher for it. And I have gained from it what I have gained by reading the old books and persisting in understanding them until I extracted that knowledge from them, then I forced myself to practice and train for a long period of my life.
And I have drawn for you from that in this chapter all that I have covered with knowledge. Apply your practice to it after I have brought it closer to you and refined it from the long-winded and shortened it as much as possible, clarified it as much as possible, and illustrated it for you with many illustrations of the tools used in it.
Indeed, it is an addition to the explanation as you have done in the preceding chapters, and there is no power except by Allah the Exalted.
Chapter One.
In the first chapter. It contains explanations about breaking bones and their treatment before we start with the descriptions of fractured and dislocated limbs, one by one. It is necessary in this topic to mention some general rules and divisions. You are first obliged to understand and remain steadfast on its truth, for those who strive to learn this noble art, it is not for you.
If there is a fracture or dislocation, or a break or disjointment in any limb, it is necessary to hurry first towards setting or reducing it, or both of them. If there is no obstacle to that, such as weakness of strength or the one who suffered from it was a child or an elderly person or the time is very hot or very cold.
Then he should limit his diet to cold food such as chicken and mutton, and prohibit alcohol and heavy meat and avoid overeating, and every food that fills the veins with blood until you are assured that the infection is gone and there is no fear of inflammation spreading to the site.
Here, the cause should be returned to its original treatment, for if a broken bone is found in an open wound, it must be fed with food that nourishes greatly and strengthens, such as wheat, barley, leeks, onions, garlic, and the hooves of cattle. And egg, lean meat, thick drink, and similar things are among this treatment. With this care, the healing of the fracture will be faster and better. Also, know that broken bones in vigorous men and old people cannot be reconnected to their original state forever.
Splint their bones and strengthen them, and that which was broken can be reconnected in the softest state similar to the bones of small children, but nature will grow on the broken bone from all sides like calluses, becoming hard and requiring pressure to be applied to one part from another.
He connects them until it reaches maximum strength and solidity, as it was originally, until nothing hinders its action.
For this reason, it is necessary to make the food of the patient rich and nourishing, as we mentioned, and know that fractures can vary in type depending on the different bones; a fracture of the bone of the leg is unlike a fracture of the skull or a fracture of the chest unlike a fracture of the back.
Similarly, all limbs differ from each other in their specific ways, and we will discuss each type of fracture in detail in its respective chapter, as the nature of bone fractures can also vary within the same category.
A fracture can occur in different ways, some without the formation of splinters and others along the length of the bone. The nature of a fracture can also be with or without soft tissue injury, and it may occur with wounding and laceration of the skin, and a fracture may be simple or compound.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific method in setting it, and the characteristics of a bone fracture will be explained in detail in its respective place. Some common signs of a fracture include swelling, deformity, pain on palpation, and crepitus (a grating sensation) upon application of pressure to the affected area.
If there is no apparent deformity, crepitus, or pain upon palpation of the bone and the cause is not obvious, it is not a fracture but may be a sprain or strain. Do not attempt to move the affected area or apply excessive pressure.
If the bone is fractured and displaced without splinters, it means that each part has separated from its respective owner.
It is necessary for you to proceed from yourself to the examination and its preparation before a hot abscess occurs for it, if a hot abscess occurs, leave it for some days until the heat of the abscess subsides, then clean it with any means possible from the probes and lances.
Know that breaking and setting a bone is easier than a fracture that has become swollen, then it becomes difficult when he mentions it, if the bone is fractured, it is necessary to delay the healing of the limb from both hands or legs.
If the limb is small, it can be set with your hands, or using ropes and hands, or using a rope and hand, the position of the bone should be placed in its natural shape until the broken pieces of the bone extend, then press firmly on those additional areas with any means possible from lances and probes.
Make sure not to cause harm, pain or abscess due to your actions, strive to grasp one of the bones with its partner in the best possible way, during that time it is necessary to examine and feel them with your hand, if you find something inconsistent correct it and set it as much as your ability allows.
Be cautious of excessive incision and strong probing as many ignorant people often cause it, and it often happens because of them. A burn or a long-lasting wound occurs in the limb, as you have probably witnessed due to their actions repeatedly.
Then, he insists on the need for thorough examination and firmness of that part (the affected limb) after treatment, and warns against moving it during his waking or sleeping hours, at times of change, seizure, bleeding or any movement with great force or extent. It is also essential to avoid causing further injury to the limb, as pain may accompany it.
That is, when a limb has been set in pain or discomfort, it should not be moved to a different position where it does not experience the same level of pain. Instead, its original setting should remain stable.
In order to avoid causing pain in the limb, do not jerk it. As for how to set a broken limb, I will describe it to you. Keep in mind that the dimensions and parts of broken limbs vary greatly; some are small like fingers, toes, ankles, etc.
For the incision in abscesses, it should be narrow and shallow, not deep like a finger, palm or chest. The incisions should be firm and tight as the wide sutures necessitate the large organ and exert pressure from all sides, leaving no gaps.
After the settlement of your place, start with the suitable plaster to apply. In a simple fracture, start with the suture at the site of the fracture itself, three or four stitches depending on the size of the organ, and press slightly with the thread. Then move to the upper side of the fracture location.
Press slightly less than your strength to the fracture site, then move away from the fracture location with the thread a little and relax the pressure a little until you take something suitable from the correct place, then take another splint and suture it also on the fracture site.
Suture, then move the thread to the lower side of the fracture and perform suturing as described in the first stitch above. Then place between the incisions of a simple abscess or an abscess that matches the curvature of the fracture.
If there are no swellings, do not make any incision in it. Then break it with another tool and probe it carefully with a blunt, straight probe if there is no air or heat in the member.
If there is air or heat in it, press on it to release the heat and let it be for days. Then, when the probes are ready, push them into it. The probes should be made of a half-cylindrical, smooth, well-polished ivory or bamboo rod.
The probes are to be made of bamboo or reeds or calabash, and they should be tapered in such a way that each probe has this shape and form.
The probe that is to be inserted into the fracture should be slightly sharper and straighter than the other probes, and as for the length of the probe, it is to be made according to the size of the broken bone, its figure being as follows:.
Then, push the probe further into the fracture with another tool according to the initial pressure exerted, and then bind it firmly with strong threads in accordance with the pressure exerted, which should be greater at the site of the fracture. After the fracture, the tension is lessened.
The threads should be moderately taut in the wound and suture, and they should be made of moist cotton specifically because if the threads are too tight like what one may observe due to ignorance, they make their threads from slackened cotton strips, which is a grave mistake.
Because it causes the tension to be excessive and tight sutures are not suitable because you cannot achieve the required tension with them, and it is not appropriate for the distance between needles to be less than a thumb's width.
If the needle pricks the edges of the wound after suturing in the correct positions, make a cushioning or loose padding under it so that it does not harm anything from that, and if there is a fracture with an injury and a tear occurs in the skin, we will discuss it separately.
Know that not every bone that is fractured requires suturing with needles from the first day, and this is because if the bone is large, needles should not be placed on it except after five or seven days, or more according to your assessment of the risk of developing a hot infection.
These are the properties of the splints that were compulsory for fractures, dislocations and wounds, a general property of the splints that compels the fracture and is suitable for most cases, especially children and women, because it does not yield to heat or cold.
Take some from the flour mill dust, which adheres to the sieve within the flour mill during its movement, grind it as usual, except that you do not sift it with egg whites and make the dough neither too thick nor too thin, then let it dry.
Another property of the splint is that it compels fractures, dislocations and wounds. It is made from wheat, barley, oats, peas, lentils, beans and corn from each ten dirhams, flour from each five dirhams, a mixture of alum at forty dirhams, and Roman clay or Armenian clay at twenty dirhams. Grind everything and mix with alum water or egg whites if the patient's condition is broken, then this splint can be used, as it is excellent for setting bones quickly and suitable for most people.
The last compound for fractures and dislocations also has a use, it is made of maghath, mash and khamim white plaster, each ten dirhems, waiting time of each five dirhems, mixed with six dirhems of clay from Armana, forty dirhems in total. It is ground finely, kneaded with water or white egg and used.
The plaster for dislocated and displaced bones, which relieves the associated pain and prevents the formation of abscesses or bone necrosis, is made with tow soaked in water, boiled oil and applied to the site. This plaster does not have binding strength.
This plaster is poor in treating hot sores and draining abscesses, however it sets broken bones. The next compound plaster is made of mulberry bark and wild cucumber leaves, ground together with water, and used as a setting plaster for fractured bone. The last short compound plaster is used in the case of bone fracture.
If you want to cure a wound from leprosy, take from the extract of walnut and pomegranate rinds, powdered cinnamon in equal parts and knead with oil or water. If the limb is not swollen, knead it with kozbera oil or water; if it is swollen, knead it with water. Use it.
The final stage of fracture analysis is stronger than the first, it is used when a hard worm occurs during bone setting, a splinter is taken from pine wood, walnut, marrow of the elephant and camel, musk, mastic, and balsam from each one separately.
All of them are crushed and kneaded with cold water or hot water, or plaster, each one according to the temperature and condition of the limb. Regarding bandages, it does not appear in his book that they should be placed on the broken bone during setting.
Only the quirkuti made from camel's fat and oil is used, and it was described as being between hard and soft. Regarding jalinos, it is considered that things containing softness along with some heat such as myrrh, sabre, lime, and similar are placed on the broken bone during setting.
The final stage of fracture is beneficial for wounds and sores, a bandage is made with cotton, chickpea flour, human hair, feathers of birds or splinters, salt in any form, which is crushed, ground, kneaded, and bound with it. As for the amount of material that should remain on the bandage.
Then if it does not happen due to a cause and there is no pain or swelling, nor movement of the broken bone from its place, do not treat it for many days. If something happens in that place, there is strong swelling or sharp pain or blowing [sound].
Then proceed to treat it immediately and remove the dressing from it, then take soft cataplasms (such as linseed or cotton wool) that are wet and apply them to the water [i.e., warm bath] and wash the place until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then put on him the warm wool soaked in oil or tallow and bind it to him for a night until the hot worm subsides, the swelling of the limb disappears, and the pain goes away, then return him to light pressure and soft dressing, do not tighten your initial bandage.
Treat him gently until he recovers. If you think that the worm, redness, pain, swelling, and all the symptoms have disappeared completely and it is necessary to apply dressing and pressure, do what you did initially. If nothing happens in the limb similar to what we mentioned.
"It shall not be opened except after three or four or five or seven days, and it may leave twenty days; all of this depends on the condition of the limb as we have said, until it is necessary to make a break and approach the flesh.
"Also, during the stretch, if it exceeds your first stretch, increase it as well in swelling the surrounding flesh as described earlier. If you see that the place of the break has become smoother and softer than what is desired, know that the swelling is prevented from reaching it.
"Cover it with hot water every time you open it, and this should be done every three days and reduce the tension a little because in doing so, the nourishment reaches the limb quickly and it recovers soon. As for the ignorant ones who forcefully break the limb again.
"If he did not force it initially, but forced it onto a hump, it is an error from their deeds and a great mistake, even if it were correct according to the initial descriptions in their books and they had practiced it and no one saw any positive effect of it. "The correct action is not to do it.
Chapter Two.
On the Fracture of the Skull in the Head.
Types of Fracture of the Skull in the Head are numerous, and their shapes vary widely, and their causes are diverse, for it may be a fracture due to a sword blow, and it either breaks all the bone or ends at the squamous part which is below the bone. Similarly to how splinters occur in wood.
And therefore, this type of fracture is called a splinter-like fracture or a partial cut of the bone with only one side broken but not completely through, and this type of fracture is called an incomplete fracture generally, and it can be either large or small.
And there is a type of fracture which may be a crushing or concussion, and its cause is a blow by stone or falling on a stone or similar, and this fracture can either be an open one that has broken through the covering under the bone or be in the face of the bone.
These two types of fractures can also be either large or small, and there is a type of fracture which may be hidden in the bone under the scalp and it is a wound that is easily overlooked.
And therefore, this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture, and it may be due to a fall or a blow with stone and so on, which penetrates the bone layer from the outside and remains concealed, as if exposed to corrosion by copper when it is struck, a part of it will enter into the interior.
That which is most common in the soft bone of the head is the fracture of the parietal bones, and it may be with or without protrusion. We will discuss its treatment in its place, and we will identify all these types of fractures by examination.
Identify it by palpation and remove the putrid flesh from over it, and as for the hairy type, it is recognized by its exposure of the bone, scratching, and rubbing over it with the probe; in this case, the fracture appears black. As for treating the fracture, first consider the symptoms of the injury.
If you see symptoms that suggest fear, such as convulsions, swelling, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, blindness, redness and similar symptoms, do not approach the injured person and do not treat him; in most cases, death occurs with these symptoms.
If you see symptoms that do not worry you and suggest safety, then proceed with treatment. This is because if the injured person comes to you soon after being injured and this happened during the cold days.
It is necessary to make an effort in removing the bone before the fourteenth day, in every case and even if it is in summer days. It is necessary to hasten the removal of the bone before the seventh day before what lies under the bone decays, as those symptoms that we have described appear.
If the bone is fractured and has reached the skull lining on the skull, and accompanied by swelling and inflammation, it is necessary to cut the affected part as I have described for you, which is to shave the head of the wound.
Expose the bone on any side that enables you and according to the shape of the wound, and whatever does not hinder on the wound. In case the exposure of the bone results in bleeding or a hot pus, deal with it accordingly.
Fill the place with plugs made of clay, oil, fat, and vinegar until the pus settles and the bleeding stops. Then take for setting the bone and removing it, and this can be done on one of two methods of work.
As for the first method, it is to cut the bone with a thin and sharp blade like this:
Then use a small part of it (the incision) afterwards, here is its image:.
Then use another small part of it (the incision), and you should have a variety of pieces, some of which are longer than others and at the endpoints, and they should be made of Indian steel or good iron.
Use the probe in striking the part (the bone) so as not to cause the skull to crack, for if the bone is strong and hard then it is necessary to bore holes around it before using the pieces with the non-chiseled hammers which are called non-chiseled hammers.
Because it (the chisel) does not exceed the limit of the skull towards what is behind it for the purpose that the chisel has a long, straight edge similar to the bevel or small circle which prevents it from slipping and piercing through the bone.
You should take a number of chisels, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone until you bring a chisel to fit the length and width of the thickness of that skull, and here are three types:. On large, medium and small fractures:
And as for how to make an incision around the broken bone, it is to make an incision on the bone and then direct it with your fingers until you know that the bone has come out. Then move the incision to another place and make a gap between each incision approximately equal to the width of the finger or close to it.
Then cut between each incision and do so with the aim of breaking the bone as much as possible, whether it be with your hand or with another tool from one of the instruments you have prepared for that purpose.
Similar to the pliers and fine tweezers, it is necessary to avoid touching the incision or the cut with anything from a saw, for if the bone is crushed and the saw adheres to it and extracts it, it must be removed.
Clean any remaining parts in the bone with another instrument similar to a saw but it must be sharper and finer than the other saws, for if there remains small bones or shavings, take them away with what you have at hand from the instruments.
Then treat the wound after that with forceps and probes, as mentioned earlier. As for the other aspect of the procedure, it is an easy stage far from danger, as Galen said and praised it extensively. This is his statement. You should first start by uncovering the bone fragment from the location where the fracture is most pronounced, until you uncover that bone fragment and find beneath it this osteotome shape: (Here, there should be an image of the osteotome's shape)
The osteotome shape should be slender, not cut anything, and the sharp portion of it should be on its shining sides as you can see. The osteotome shape serves as a guide for the chisel, and the sharp portion in the bone should be struck from one side.
Use a small hammer to cut all the bone smoothly as it turns, and you are safe from the danger of splitting (the bone), even if the patient is an expert or a novice.
If there remains something attached to the bone from the splinter in some places of the bone, remove it with the same osteotome shape and cut through it smoothly as it turns, for it will detach without harm or fear.
If the bone fracture does not reach the splinter and only a piece of the bone was cut off with its face remaining, and there is roughness and unevenness on its surface, it is necessary to smooth out that roughness and level out those unevenness using files of different measurements so you can use them in every situation according to its suitability and make it smooth as appropriate.
For broken bones and their shape, it is necessary that in your treatment you first align the fragments, then use a larger instrument on them, and continue to do so with smaller ones until you reach using the finest and sharpest of all.
For minor fractures and delicate breaks, it is necessary to treat each individually according to what leads to its healing. This is something not hidden from one who has knowledge in this craft. The least painful method and the cessation of movement are written and clearly indicated for major fractures.
If the dressing remains uncovered during your bone setting, it is necessary to take a pair of forceps according to the severity and to apply oil or fat on them, then place them in the wound, followed by taking another pair of similar or triple forceps. Apply it with oil or fat and place it on the first pair of forceps, then make this as gently as you can so as not to burden the scalpel, followed by using narrow bands from above without squeezing more than necessary to hold only the wound.
Keep him with this treatment for one or two days until the acute pain subsides, then dissolve it and use afterwards the medicines that are effective for consolidation such as gum resin, powdered coriander seed, powdered cinnamon and ginger root, and similar ones. Make these medicines into a paste.
Apply to the wound as it is soft, and in general, use a medicine that illuminates but does not burn. Exert your effort when treating the wound, so it remains clean. Do not allow fat or pus to accumulate, nor leave maggots to gather in it.
If maggots gather on the skull, they will rot and soften it, which leads to a great danger in such cases. The skull may appear exposed when bones are revealed, especially if neglected during treatment.
A blackening on the surface indicates that the symptoms mentioned previously have occurred, meaning there is no hope of recovery. If blackening occurs due to a medicine applied, it is because the medicine has such power to cause this blackening.
It is necessary to take three parts of honey and three parts of camel fat, beat them well, mix them together, then apply the mixture to the skull and treat it with various treatments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Treating a Broken Nose.
Know that a nose can only break due to the upper part breaking completely or one of its parts, because the lower part is cartilage and does not break. Instead, it becomes deformed, twisted, or crooked.
If one of his nasal bones is broken, it is necessary to insert the little fingers into the nostril and repair the fracture from inside with your pointed finger and remove the swelling from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. This should be done by you so that nothing happens due to your action and pain occurs.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, repair should be done with a pointed instrument, slightly curved. If the break is on both sides, the same procedure should be followed, applying pressure on the first day after the fracture.
If swelling does not occur after seven or ten days from the heat of the wound, then enter a catheter made from cane into the nostril if the fracture is on one side, or two catheters if it is on both sides.
Make the catheter slender enough to fit into the nostril and remember some of the early practitioners mentioned that the catheter should be smeared with oil every day. However, I do not find it necessary, rather it is preferable to smear the catheter with white egg yolk mixed with flour from a mill.
Then, leave the fistula (opening) to allow the bone to heal and the passageways to harden. Afterward, insert into the nasal cavity tubes of red vinegar (Euzaena) after burning them with a linen thread. This will make its confinement stronger, so that the patient does not stop breathing.
It is not necessary to make this (treatment) or the fistula, but if you want to expose the nose in the course of your work and apply heat, then cauterize the nostril with kiryot or a cotton ball wrapped in oil and wax or something similar from the remedies of physicians.
If heat does not occur, it is necessary to cauterize it from the outside with fine semolina and sand that we have ground with egg white. Then, apply a linen cloth over it and do not tie the nose with anything because if the bones of the nose break, they will break in small pieces.
If it perforates, it is necessary to cauterize it and remove it with the appropriate instrument. Then, sew up the hole and treat it with what heals and soothes from the remedies that agree with this. If a wound occurs inside the nose, it is necessary to treat it with a fistula and use lead tubes. Until it bleeds.
Chapter Four.
If the lower jaw is fractured.
If the lower jaw is fractured and not accompanied by an injury to the face, if it is only broken externally and has not been broken in two, and it sinks into the interior, its recognition is easy.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, to insert a splinter from the left hand into the mouth of the patient and similarly, if the fracture is in the left side, to insert a splinter from the right hand and lift the fracture particle from within and bring it outward.
And hold the other hand outside the bone to guide it in setting, for if the jaw is fractured and has split into two, it is necessary to use a wedge from both sides until it can be set, but if it has happened in the teeth it will grind them.
Or it may separate, so take a thread of gold or silver or brass, then put it on the fractured jaw and place a wedge on top of it, then put a large and firm weight or a piece of rawhide equal in length to the jaw on the wedge. Then bind it from above, according to what is suitable for its binding and compress it until it does not burst. Command the ill person to rest, relax, and make his food mild. If you think that something has changed in its shape from one of the faces, then prepare for its healing on the third day.
Then bind it from above, according to what is suitable for its binding and compress it until it does not burst. Command the ill person to rest, relax, and make his food mild. If you think that something has changed in its shape from one of the faces, then prepare for its healing on the third day. Then heal what you are compressing with the powder of pomegranate peel mixed with white egg or fine semolina after removing the scabs from it, and place a soft poultice on top of the compression. If that compression remains attached to it and does not change for the bone, leave it alone.
Do not heal it until it breaks open and the fracture spreads widely, for this fracture often spreads in three weeks. If swelling appears or a hot abscess forms, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until that abscess goes away.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, if it has broken away from the bone with fragments or shards, be gentle in extracting those fragments as you see fit using whatever tool suits you, for if there is narrowness at the site of the wound, widen it with a probe to your need.
Then, if you remove those fragments and nothing remains from them, draw a ligature for the wound if it is wide, otherwise carry one of the sutures that are suitable for that. Draw the wound until it heals.
The fifth chapter.
In the case of fracture, bind it.
When a fracture occurs, it is usually at the end of a bone and it breaks in one of three ways: either it splinters and fragments without causing any sharp pieces, or it causes pieces to appear and this is easier to bind.
If sharp pieces occur due to fracture, it is more difficult to bind and if the fracture occurs with a wound, work on it only if the fracture is not accompanied by a wound. Then, summon assistants to hold one of them above the broken bone and the other to pull the neck towards the opposite side.
Then, shape the fracture with your fingers until it takes the desired shape and there is no protrusion or depression. If more pressure is required, place a small ball of cotton or gauze under the affected area.
The bone should be as long as necessary and the fracture should be pulled and compressed with your hand until the fracture is shaped as desired. If it is not possible to pull the fractured end outwards because it has gone too deep, the lever should be applied to the affected area.
The fracture is situated beneath a knob in the bone, and the assistant should press it downwards until the bone of the prominence rises up. Then you will repair the break and set it using your fingers.
If you suspect that a bone from the prominence has been fractured and it is moving, it is necessary to compress it and remove that fragment along with it. If the fragment is embedded in the bone, it should be broken into pieces according to the predetermined cuts. After the prominence, the device that holds the saw is placed, and it is a tool made of wood or metal as shown here.
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width is according to the size of the bone it is intended for, while its length depends on what you can work with. It has two sides, one wider and the other narrower as shown by the wider side or the narrower one.
If a wound has been made during the extraction of a bone fragment and it is wide open and you have transmitted the heat of the wound, collect the edges of the wound with stitching, and if the wound is narrow or you fear the spread of heat, close the wound with the incision and apply the beneficial effects to the extent that the wound is closed.
If a boil or abscess is hot, make an incision in the skin around it and apply either oil, salve, or alcohol, then cover it. As for hardening of bones when it's neither fracture nor breakage, it should be treated by applying plaster made from oven ash mixed with white of egg to the affected bone. Place a soft poultice on it then place a cup under the poultice if needed, then take a long and narrow strip of cloth, place linseed oil or olive oil on it and wrap the poultice and plaster with it, then tie it with a thin rope from a smooth board. It should have a width of three fingers and be as long, then stretch it out in the incision, then place the cup in the same position as the fracture, then tie the cup along with the plaster at the location of the fracture, then tighten the plaster on the fracture as it rotates. And the cord should be placed around his neck and under the healthy side of the bandage and under the patient's bandage, and it should be tightened on all sides as you see fit, so that the fracture is tightly bound, which is not hidden from you.
Make sure the bandage does not loosen from the broken bone. It is necessary to examine the wound daily. If the sutures loosen and the abscess appears, correct it and tighten the sutures. Then make the patient sleep on his back and place a small pad under his buttocks during sleep at night.
Lift his arm away from the affected side to raise the fracture or dislocate the shoulder, or tie his arm to his neck if it does not loosen within ten days of the incident, unless a complication such as an infection occurs.
Then renew the dressings if you observe any sign of deterioration for that purpose. Bandage and leave it until it becomes hard and the fracture heals, and it strengthens more in twenty days. It may be less for some people.
The Sixth Chapter.
In a broad fracture of the shoulder, only bones are broken, not the joint itself, and it is not common to fracture directly in the middle of the joint. This can only be determined by touch. Depending on the shape of the fracture, its form can be determined.
Straighten it and bandage it in its natural shape from all sides of the wound that you can, then apply flour of wheat with white egg and mild vinegar on top of the wound, then place a flat abscess made from thin leaves over it, and cover it with a wide, flat leaf.
Incise to the extent of the shoulders or slightly beyond, if it is under the clavicle, make an excavation in one of the shoulder's positions. Soften that excavation with a pallid cautery until the clavicle settles onto the bone surface, then tighten from above with a long forceps.
Tighten firmly and withdraw the clavicle until it does not move from its place, and every day check the bandage. When the bandage becomes loose, tighten it again and adjust the clavicle if it moves from its place. The arm should hang naturally on the correct side, and the shoulders will relax in 20 days.
After 20 or 50 days, if these number of days have passed, then release the bandage and you will be safe, for it is one of the bones that fear is not feared to break or dislocate. If a piece protrudes from the bone and was under the skin, break it open and remove it. And perform what you described in the case of a fractured femur for relief of the hot worm if anything like that happens.
The Seventh Chapter.
In the clavicle, case of a fractured chest.
If the chest is fractured in the middle, it rarely occurs and if its sides are fractured, they break more often and dislocate. Among its symptoms if the middle of the chest is fractured, it inclines towards below and exposes to pain, difficulty in breathing and suffocation.
"If a wound is made in the skin and it reveals a fracture in the broken bone, and it is not hidden to touch, he must bring the limb to the surface and make it lie between his armpits, then press the fractured parts together and collect the shards of the bone with both hands, treating each side as necessary.
"Then shape the bone as required, then wrap and bind it with bandages and place a splint made of slivers of wood or bone on top of it in the hollow part after breaking it. "Then treat it gently in binding the broken bone to prevent it from slipping, and pass the bandages around it towards the surface several times and tighten it firmly, then check the bandages at all times, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again.
"If necessity requires its solution in the case of an illness, injury or fracture, then treat it and remove the bandages and fix what is exposed by the method of treatment, then return the bandages if you see fit. "Turn him on his side and forcefully press him until he expires.
"Chapter Eight.
In the fractures of bones: If they break, it should be known that the fractures occur only in those places that are rough and are adjacent to the back, and pressure exposes them to pain because they are fragile. This is not hidden to the touch during examination with the fingers.
Apply pressure to it with the fingers on the face where it is possible until its shape becomes as required, then let it dry and harden the broken bone with a splint if that is necessary. If the fracture of bones is near to the inside, it exposes the patient to severe pain.
We break it like a fracture that exposes the patient to piercing pain because the bone breaks the covering and it also exposes him to difficulty, distress, bleeding profusely and this makes the treatment difficult, and the ends may change into various forms.
Among them is one who says that it is necessary to make food for the patient that does not produce wind and air so that his abdomen expands and swells, and the fracture is pushed outwards. We dislike this because it may increase the risk of a severe hot fever if it does not occur or if it has occurred, it increases and strengthens it.
Some of them say that it should be placed on the spot, then pressed strongly, and it resembles measurement except that he fears that the pressing will attract pus to the spot due to its weakness, and some of them say that it is necessary to cover the spot with a cloth soaked in hot oil.
The cure for the fissure between the anus will be to fill it until the ring is level, if the rectum is stretched over a roller, then treat the cause with the treatment of the ulcer from food and medicine, for if the cause is strong, it cannot be endured. The bone penetrates the abdominal wall causing pain and we fear the cause, so it is necessary to incise on the spot and expose the broken intestine beneath it, then place a tool that preserves the blade and describes its shape, and cut the bone with it and remove it.
Then we gather the wound if it is large with stitching and treat it with a bandage until it heals, for if it appears and the inflammation is hot, then apply the remedy in the oil of leeks and place it on the spot and treat the cause from within as well.
The wound is to be explored on the side that sleeps upon it until it opens up.
The ninth section.
Suturing of the forehead and neck.
If a bone of the neck is broken and it is not exposed, or if it is more exposed to fracture and also if a skull fracture occurs, then when that condition is presented to someone and you want to know if it opens up or does not open up. If he observes that his hands are numb, cold and lifeless and he cannot move them or stretch them or grasp them, and if you squeeze or press it with a probe, but he does not feel it and finds no pain in them, then know that it will not open up in most cases, for it is dying.
And if he moves them and feels it in them with a squeeze or press, then know that the bone has healed and that it will open up with treatment. If a skull fracture occurs similarly, and you want to know whether it will also open up or not.
Look at his legs, if you see that they are numb and the same thing happens as in the hands, then when he lies down gas escapes from his stomach without his will and if he is cut open on his abdomen, urine comes out without his will. If it (urinary stone) has been ejected onto the back and the person intends to urinate but is unable to do so, know that he is dying; there is no cure for this case, as if it were not exposed to such a thing, the matter would be easier. Treatment for what has occurred from this (situation) is to apply warmth to ease the burning pain.
Place warm oil or a mixture of egg yolks and clarified butter on the inflamed bladder three times a day until the burning pain subsides. Then, apply one of the tight, cleansing bandages and bind it with a rope, instruct him to remain still and rest.
He should not sleep on the side that causes him pain until he recovers, as any pressure or anything that has caused pain in the bone must be massaged and the bone removed. Then, gather the wounded eyes if they are large with stitching, and treat them with warm poultices until they heal. If a bone in the jaw is broken and it prevents biting, then insert a probe from the left hand into the socket.
Straighten the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, and then apply bandages and splints if necessary, and bind it tightly.
If you suspect a fractured bone, crack it open and remove it, then treat the wound with appropriate therapy until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
In case of fractured bone: crack it open.
When the bones of the back are fractured, they usually crack and break into several parts. The fragments will protrude from their original position, and if not treated immediately, the patient may experience severe pain and immobility.
Feel the fracture with your hand to determine its shape, if the fracture is along the sides only, then align it as best you can until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in length or has moved towards the inside, place a pillow beneath it to align it, then wrap it with bandage and fix it firmly using a splint made of wood or leather.
Do not be afraid of the fracture shifting or the splint falling off. Adjust the bandage around the affected limb to keep it stable, and order the patient to lie on their back or the unaffected side. If exposed, cover with a warm blanket.
Apply pressure on the swelling and hold it until the hot worm settles down, then place what settles it on top of it as it advances, then return to the pressure and tighten it as necessary. If there is exposure in the bone or something protrudes from its sides, it should not be removed.
Do not press, but soothe from outside as we said and leave the pressure until it settles down.
The tenth section.
On bone fracture.
The bone is between the joints and the end of the arm; if it breaks, press on both sides with one hand taking a splint made of hard wood in the middle position as shown here:.
Tie strips on both sides, then attach from a raised position and the patient sits down on a chair. Then, the fractured limb is placed on the splint until it becomes fixed in the middle of the splint's curve. Then, something heavy is attached above it.
Or the servant holds it downwards, then the doctor aligns the fracture with his hands until it is in its proper position. The other face is that the patient leans on his elbow and ties his hand with a strap.
Then order one of your servants to grip what is above the fracture in his hand, and the other to grasp below it, and each of them moves towards his side. If you wish that the movement be stronger, tighten under the fracture with straps and above it with straps, and let both servants move towards the opposite sides.
If the fracture is close to the edge of the bone, it is necessary for the strap to be [at the center] under the shinbone and below the fracture towards the joint, and similarly if the fracture is close to the joint, it is necessary that the strap is on that location and on the joint itself.
Then align the fracture with a splint that is not too tight until the fracture is in its proper position, then it is refined by adjustments until it fits well. If there is no swelling or hotness, keep it as it is, but if there is swelling or heat, leave it for the seventh day and place on it a wet woolen cloth soaked with oil of almonds and rose water.
Until the swelling subsides, then tighten it, the treatment for tightening is to hold the splint on the fracture, then place a new piece of rope over the splint, then bind the arm to the body with the hand open on the bone.
The fracture and the blow affect the body and the limb, causing the limb to assume the position of a dislocated shoulder if it does not prevent you from doing so. If you fear that something may change for you due to the broken bone, use the splint.
Place the splint on the fracture, making it wider and stronger than other splints. Ensure that there is a space of one finger between each splint. Let the length of the splint be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from every side.
Then, you press on the splints with the pressure that was mentioned in the first chapter.
Make your pressure on the location of the fracture stronger.
Whenever after the fracture, you feel that the pressure is less, if you see that the splints and the pressure are as we said in the case of applying force to the limb within your time, then do it.
If you fear the hot pain, leave the pressure and the splint for a day as we said, then inspect the bandage every three days so that nothing happens in the place or swelling or blocking of food from reaching the limb due to the persistence of the pressure. It will heal everything as we mentioned.
If you are certain that nothing of this will occur, do not remove the sutures except after several days, and make it so that the cause of pain is on his back and his hand on the affected side, and place it under the body attached with a band filled with cotton made evenly.
Examine at all times, whether day or night, to ensure that the shape of the fractured bone does not heal improperly or the sutures break apart. Correct this thoroughly with your effort, and make the food for the patient on the level specified, which is that the food should be soft initially until the bones have solidified.
It is necessary that the patient's diet be softened, for it is common in bones and joints to heal in forty days. At that time, it is necessary to remove the sutures and use the warm bath to treat it with suitable ointments, for if the fracture is severe, it requires such treatment.
Do not remove the sutures from him for fifty days or two months.
The second chapter.
On the treatment of an arm fracture.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius and the ulna, one smaller above and the other larger below it, so it is unlikely that only the larger bone will break or only the smaller bone will break, and even less likely that they will break together.
When the small upper bone (of the nose) is broken, its reduction becomes easier and quicker. When the lower bone is broken, breaking it is difficult and reducing it is laborious, and if both bones are broken together, then the bone that the small upper bone of the nose was attached to, is the one that was broken.
It is necessary for the physician, during reduction, to make the movement gentle until he sets it straight. If the large bone (of the nose) is broken, it is necessary to make the movement stronger. If both bones are broken, it is necessary to make the movement very strong.
The shape of the hand should be placed during reduction and the movement made slow on a sideways motion. The thumb should be above all fingers and the little finger below them, with the index finger raised slightly on top of it.
The position (of the fingers) should be such that it is not difficult for the index finger to reach upwards.
Then the servant holds it from below, either with his hand or with a rope, and another servant holds it from above in the same manner. The physician then sets the bone until it is set properly. If there are fragments of bone, they should be removed.
Apply every ulcer in its place with your effort, if you find an ulcer that is free and it penetrates the skin without being attached to it, then make a cut on it and remove it according to the method mentioned earlier; if the break occurs with a wound, you have amputated by mistake.
Take treatment from there, if it appears in the first layer of your skin and is a hot swelling; the leech should be applied with qirot al-maymooni (a kind of leech used for healing) made from the fat of a pig and white camphor and be between boiling and burning heat. Hold the leech gently until the swelling disappears.
Remove the leech and put the soft cloth soaked with ash from the oven mixed with white egg, then place the bladder and let it be the same size as the wound. Know that usually four bladders are placed on an arm.
If the break is in one tendon or in two together, then make your grip stronger and firmer on the site of the break. Every time you apply more pressure either upward or downward, make the pressure slightly longer as mentioned earlier.
To make the wound, which has been broken, soft and not too hard; the thread that sews it should be medium between coarse and fine as previously described, and the limb and suture should be inspected after several days.
"If something occurs that needs to be corrected, such as a foreign object in the limb, it is necessary to immerse the affected limb in clean warm water until the object settles and leave the limb undisturbed at night until it relaxes, then the wound should be sutured again.
"If the suturing has healed and the bone is broken or similar, correct it as much as possible, and also if food prevents the wound from healing, it is necessary to temporarily restrict food intake until the nutrients reach the limb, then resume suturing.
"If the limb is not affected by any of what we have mentioned, it should not be cut off except after forty days or a similar period, then tie the affected limb to its neck, keep the arm level and protect it from excessive movement, make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm usually heals in thirty or forty days, but sometimes it may take sixty-two days; all of this depends on the conditions of the patient and their strength.
The Third Chapter.
In treating the fracture of the hand and fingers.
The breaking of the wrist and sprain of the fingers is less common than actual fractures or dislocations; however, it is more common for the wrist to have a fracture or dislocation.
The patient should sit up with his back supported and in front of him a chair on a low stool.
Then he should put his hand in a cloth and the assistant holding the broken bones will adjust them as the physician sees fit until they fit together well; at that point, it is necessary to apply a splint and bandage unless there has been no swelling or excessive heat. A cushion made of fabric from above should then be placed on top according to the situation.
If the fracture is near the bottom of the wrist, make a small ball from cotton and tell the patient to hold it with his uninjured hand while a long splint is applied.
The cataplasma (jabirah) should be made from soft skin. Apply it to the affected area with all the fingers pressed together and press as necessary. If there is a tear toward the outside, make another cataplasma above and one below in the finger to keep the hand open.
Hold the finger as it rotates and interlace the fingers with a bandage. If the wound is between two fingertips, apply pressure as necessary then press with the hand. You may also wish to make a small cataplasma to keep the wound in place.
If the wound is on the side (wast) or the tip (sabbat), do not move it. Interlace with the proper finger or interlace all of them onto a splint. This is best, or place a small cataplasma on it.
As we said before, in the case of injury and abscess formation after cauterization, apply what is necessary to the inflammation whenever it occurs, as described.
Chapter Fourteen.
On the Cauterization of Fractures.
Bone of the thigh frequently breaks and becomes palpable to touch as it twists toward front and back, its tightening being such that one bandage is applied above the fracture and another below, with the causative factor drawn out on its surface.
Then each bandage is directed to its side in accordance with this if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the origin of the thigh, it is necessary that a tight bandage be applied, either of thread or something similar.
At the origin of the thigh, towards the anus, the bandage should be directed above and the other bandage below the fracture, and similarly if the fracture is near the buttock, the bandage should be near the buttock for the downward direction, then the physician aligns the bone with both hands until it matches the natural shape.
The bone is broken finely, so it is necessary to bear the burden and tightness unless a pain or fever occurs in the limb; if a fever occurs in it, leave it for some days until the sharp pain subsides, then return to treating it.
As for tightening, it is necessary to apply a strong and wide plaster to the fracture twice or thrice and leave some excess, then apply the arm until the bone reaches the origin of the joint and introduce a long string between the thigh and the leg close to the buttock from below; the ends of the string are left above on both sides.
Then turn to the vein and artery where there is an excess, then make a ligature at the site of the break, and from it make one ligature on the bone of the penis, then fill the gap that is between the artery and the penis with soft catgut so that it matches the tension.
Then begin with tightening the strength from the center at the site of the break, three or four times, and each time you have passed the ligature from the site of the break, your tension should be less, softer and shorter.
Then proceed to the ends of the ligature which you have inserted between the artery and the penis, tie them with more ligatures from above, then pass over the ends of the ligature downwards until it reaches the ankle, then tighten both sides of the ligatures from the other side as well.
In order for the ligature not to loosen from its place, then leave the tension on it as long as it does not cause the limb to eat, or be infected, or swell, or produce a smell and similar things, but if something of that happens, cure it and repair whatever has happened from it according to what we have previously mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a hard calcification in the bone that obstructs, it is necessary to remove it if possible, and otherwise break it and remove it, then treat the wound with what is similar to what has been previously mentioned until it heals. This break of the artery may be without adding the penis by ligatures.
According to what we mentioned in the limb and bone, except that its grip is thus, it does not expose itself to danger when pulling, even if it has been gripped, unless a finger is attached to it, in which case, its owner must always be careful.
The finger will thicken within fifty days, or it may increase slightly or decrease slightly, all of this is subject to the differences in conditions and other circumstances.
Chapter Fifteen.
On breaking a shinbone.
A shinbone fracture is relatively susceptible to breakage and is more susceptible to swelling. If it is prone to breaking, then it will either be split or fragmented in its parts, and this may occur with injury or without injury.
Place it thus (the broken shinbone) with care, grip it so that it reassembles the parts separated from its parts by the fingers until they join and become aligned, then apply a splint and put on a cast if necessary.
It will thicken from the place of the previous fracture, then all conditions that were described in other fractures such as inflammation and similar will meet and confront each other until every issue is resolved to the point of healing.
Sixteenth Chapter.
Breaking of the Bone: Treatise on Fractures.
The Bone of the Leg has Two Parts: One is Thick, called the Tibia, and the Other is Slender, known as the Fibula; both are Subject to Kinds of Fractures, except the Ulna [of the Arm]. And for this reason, the Bone-setting [technique] is the same for both [the Tibia and Fibula]; if both Bones are fractured, the Leg bends in all Directions; if the Slender Bone is fractured, the Leg bends towards the Front; if the Thick Bone, which happens from Below, it becomes evident to you.
The Rod, the Alignment and the Binding [of the bones] are to be applied according to that; except that it is necessary when the Fracture of the Leg is severe, with many Sharp Fragments, for the Rod to be Shorter and Lighter, and exert more Effort in the Setting.
In the Leg, there is something additional to the Arm; that when you have aligned and completed all your Work, take two [pieces of] Wool from a Broom Handle, which are used in Stuffing the Cushions between the Planks or are made of Reed Mats or similar.
Choose from it what has a slight toughness and not be brittle, and let its length be equal to that of the little finger from the knee down, then press on each one with two incisions along its length. Place one in the finger and the other on the opposite side.
From the knee down to the foot, then bind the splints in three places from both sides and the center. With this arrangement, the finger will not bend towards the right or north, but rather it will straighten out properly. A dowel of wood can be used of a length equal to that of the finger.
Place it [the dressing] in to preserve it from movement, and it is best to do so when there is a specific injury. Then examine the finger daily and pay close attention to it for prevention of infection or inflammation or anything like that. When something of this kind occurs, treat it with what is necessary to heal, and the bone of the finger may become stiff within thirty days or thereabouts.
The seventh chapter.
On the fracture of bones in the hand and fingers.
As for the carpus, it does not subject to fracture of the bone, and as for the bones of the leg, they may be subject to fracture, and the fingers also are less likely to be subjected to fracture but rather prone to rupture in most cases.
If the leg bone is exposed, it is broken and you see some of those bones have sharpened each other; place your foot on the ground flatly like a camel, then stand and place your foot on what has risen from those bones, then break and set it.
Until it returns to its position, then take the splints and bandages from above and place them under the sole of the foot on a small flat surface with two concave sides, then press firmly on it with force after breaking it with a lever and all that is needed.
If it lasts for three or four days, release the splint. You will find the bones have healed or are still broken; perform the work as you see fit. As for if any fingers are broken, force and set them according to what was described to you in the art of hand fracture.
Then make a splint for the broken fingers to their length, and let it project slightly from them. Then place this board that was described to you under the foot and press it firmly, for if any bones are broken in two or three or more.
Make on every nail a bezel of its size in a white socket and tighten the blade at the bottom of the foot, so that each end of the blade protrudes outside the leg to fix it properly.
It is important for you to remember everything we have mentioned regarding the fractures of all kinds and the various symptoms we have described, and to apply it accordingly for each symptom as required.
The Fourteenth Section.
Fracture of the woman's pelvis, temple bone, and man's bone (arm).
When a woman's pelvis is fractured, position her upright, then slightly tilt her to the side, and grab her from behind. Then, bind her hip with bandages until it fills and becomes like a ball in her pelvis.
Then, shake the woman and raise her slightly to make the bandages come out until it appears at the entrance of the pelvis like a ball and the fracture of the bone recovers. Then, make an opening on her abdomen whenever she desires to urinate, so that you can remove the bandages along with it until she urinates.
Put it back in the same way as you inserted it initially, then return to her original position. Do this for seven days or so, as it will heal, and if you wish to administer a suppository, insert a thin tube into her vagina and fill all of it with the suppository in her pelvis.
Then inflate the bladder with strength until it inflates in the abdomen, for when it breaks, it returns. Then sew it up with linen and let it heal for several days until it bursts open, and as for when the bone of the anus is broken in a man or woman, it is used in setting it.
And sew it as described in the bone setting, and it is not hidden from you that this strange fracture is rare and not easily found except for one who has some experience with my book, because the fracture itself indicates, in most cases.
On the path of correcting it (the fracture) and binding it, understand (it). As for a man when his anus is broken, take a hollow tube made of ox horn, enter it into him, then place a splint made of wood on it and let it remain for three or four days until it bursts open.
The Tenth Chapter.
On Bone Setting with Wounding.
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wounding, and especially if the bone is large like the phalanx or shoulder blade or similar, to hasten its reduction as soon as possible when conditions for reduction are met as we have mentioned.
If the wound exudes blood, it is necessary to apply powdered cautery to it immediately, unless there is something else available. Then, take in your hand the fracture on that day with your eyes and do not delay it.
If no inflammation occurs, do nothing. But if inflammation occurs, leave the fracture for nine days until the hot inflammation subsides and do not approach it on the third or fourth day. For it is susceptible to harmful effects during this time.
If the fractured bone appears through the skin, it is necessary to bind and set it with your hand along with a soft splint. If you are unable to bind and set it with your hand, then use this instrument, which is made of iron, about the length of seven fingers or eight. Display it according to the wound.
Therefore, the physician should take from it three or four (pieces) in accordance with what is required for treatment in each type of fracture and make them rotatable so that there is a slight protrusion in it to prevent it from slipping during use at the time of treatment.
The edge should be sharp with a slight indentation at the end and it should be tapered towards the protrusion and from half of it to below, it should be very sharp. Here is its image:.
The surgery called Yunaniyyah Perm is intended to cause a small fracture, the edge of it should be sharp and meeting with the nearby bone, then push it back until the bone returns and levels some of the gaps, forming a setting for the fractured sides to align.
If the fractured side is sharp and not properly taken by the tool, it should be cut until the tool can grasp it. If it cannot be pushed back as described earlier, it should be cut at places that we have mentioned.
Share it with one of the saws as you can, then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and splinters. If the bone returns after being pushed back and the swelling appears after it and pain is severe, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you are able to push it back to its natural position, you will be of great benefit to the patient. If you exhaust your strength with the bone, make a hole in it with a black potion specifically if you are in summer and do not put bandages or anything containing fat on the wound.
To prevent decay and corruption, use the forceps when you are free from setting the bone, leaving the wound open so it may heal by itself with pressure applied using the pledgets in the incisions according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to overstretch the wound during fracture, for often it is due to the ignorance of physicians that they cause either death or gangrene for their patients. Let your pressure be moderate and opposed to the pressure exerted by other fractures.
If the wound is shallow or large and you fear some minor adverse effects mentioned earlier, do not apply forceps and make incisions with a steel probe in the location of the forceps and bind it with them.
If after a day or two, you see that the wound is starting to produce pus, remove the probe placed in it with liquid, then use the scissors and probes which we commonly call surgical probes such as four-pronged probes and similar instruments, and you should ensure that the ligature is loosened.
You should inspect the wound every day at evening and morning until it closes, and you should ensure that the limb is set so that pus can easily drain from it. If the pus does not drain for several days and has not separated from the wound, know that there are small bone fragments present in it.
It is necessary to probe the wound with a probe, if there are any foreign bodies found, remove and extract them. If it is not free from such particles and it penetrates the tissue causing pain, form a swelling at the site of the injury, then you should remove it completely in all directions.
If there is any wound, ulcer or other kind of damage and defect in the tissue, it is necessary to address each type with the treatment prescribed for it, describing it in its respective chapter.
It is important to remain with the patient and prepare your mind if a major bone is broken, such as the femur or tibia and fibula from the large bones, for you should not attempt to pull it together nor extract it. Often, death occurs in such cases, but you should leave it to heal naturally, for perhaps after twenty or thirty days, it will reattach itself by itself.
If you see a place in the wound suitable for treatment, then treat it, otherwise leave it alone.
The Tenth Chapter.
Treatment of Contracture that Occurs due to Some Fractures.
This contracture often occurs due to immobility following a fracture, and it is seldom far from the joint, causing the shape of the limb to be distorted and perhaps preventing natural function.
If the swelling is linear, use medications that have a constricting effect such as scammony, lupine, madder, opium poppy, almonds and similar substances. Take one or all of them, knead with a binding liquid such as vinegar, white of egg or gum.
Apply it on the swelling with strong pressure and leave the pressure for several days until it dissolves, then remove it and repeat if necessary until the swelling disappears, God willing, or apply a hard piece of lead to it.
If the lead has a special property that dissolves in all tissues, if the swelling becomes hardened and tightens the need to remove it, break it from above and cut off the surrounding tissue or soften it with some tools until it dissipates and heals the wound until it is cured.
The 21st Chapter.
In the treatment of fractures, if it becomes calloused and remains rough after that.
If a bone fracture heals and the limb remains rough and weak after that, it is due to many causes. One of them may be due to excessive healing of ligaments and tying them on something inappropriate, or due to overtightening of ligaments to prevent food from reaching the limb, or due to excessive and irregular swelling, or due to irregular movements at the wrong time, or due to little blood in the patient's body and weakness.
The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make him exercise until blood increases in his body, then use the cupping glass and insert the suction tube into it along with leeches and similar things, then apply leeches on the limb to draw nourishment towards it or keep the swelling by water. until food flows through it and returns to its natural shape.
The second and fortieth chapter.
In the treatment of broken bones, if they become swollen and are immobilized improperly.
When a limb has been fractured and then healed with swelling or the broken bone becomes twisted or distorted in that manner. Unless the limb does not prevent its natural movement, it is not permissible for someone to claim that he can break a bone from the head, as many ignorant physicians and enforcers do in our country.
This action is highly dangerous, leading to a great risk of infection, but if the wound and swelling are straight, it is necessary to clean it with boiling water in which aromatic herbs such as papyrus leaves, rose oil, ambergris, and similar have been boiled.
It is necessary to use the sharp, well-made diachylon or take the aromatic substance of papyrus leaves, beat it with chicken fat and sheep oil, and apply it, or take the tyn dusm and crush it with soap powder, among other medicines known as "napqadh al-andimal.
When swelling occurs, it is necessary to massage the area continuously and gently with a smooth, thin needle that should always be in hand, moving the limb in all directions during each occasion. If the swellings have settled and worsened and hardened and require treatment with iron.
It is necessary to cut off the swelling and separate the bone and remove any excess swelling or bone with incisions of moderate width, using forceps in the process with care and caution, then treat the wound as described until it heals.
Chapter Three and Forty.
The jaw is a joint that leaves its place and becomes fixed, preventing movement, causing the shape of the bone to change, and resulting in injuries or severe pain. Therefore, when anyone has a jaw problem, it is necessary for him to go immediately to its reduction.
The patient should not wait because if he delays the pain and swelling of the place will make it harder to reduce the jaw, so he should not delay, move or touch in case of pain as it often leads to numbness and harmful injuries.
If such a case arises, it is necessary to go to the cause of the problem and then wait until the swelling subsides slightly, then immerse the bone in hot water and oil, then reduce it with help and treat each bone as indicated in its place.
The bones of the jaw are also arranged from top to bottom of the body.
The Fourth and Fifth Jaw Bone.
Treatment of a broken lower jaw.
If the jaws are dislocated, they will only be able to be put back in place in a state of anesthesia, and their removal will be on one or two sides, either by sliding them gently back into place or completely removing them until they return. The excerpt translates to: "Until reaching the chest, so as not to inflict pain on the patient and he is unable to grasp it or can't endure pressure, thus he will speak with his tongue, if it comes out easily, then it usually returns more smoothly.
"If the fracture is complete, it should be returned promptly and not delayed, and the servant should hold the head of the patient while the doctor inserts his one hand into the mouth of the fractured jaw from one side.
"Or both his hands are inserted if the jaw is from both sides, and all his fingers from outside straighten it, and he (the patient) is ordered to open his mouth wide and let go of the jaw, and the doctor straightens the jaw and pushes it back to its original position.
"If the return is difficult and if both jaws are fractured, then hot oil or fat is used to facilitate their return, as we have mentioned, and they should not be delayed in returning them. Once they return and align, and if the jaw does not lock or dislocate again, then a plaster made of clay, lard and wool is applied.
Then bind it with a ligature of silk, and let its head and neck be tucked between two linen folds so that it does not move to the right, left, or north. It should not exert pressure on any organ but make its food liquid.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw is fixed, let him eat whatever he desires without using a probe or holding his mouth open during eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is fixed and the swelling subsides.
If the jaws are locked and they do not move to their respective places, it often happens that pain, permanent swelling, or a bulging belly occurs, and sometimes the abdomen swells and tightens in several places. If you see this, know that it is damaged.
And often a person dies from that within ten days.
The fifth and fortieth section.
In the treatment of jaw dislocation and fracture of the mandible.
As for the dislocation, it does not move from the internal side due to its connection with the chest and it may dislocate outward, which can be felt by touch, and it must be immobilized by the patient lying on his back and extending his arms.
Then press the site with your fist with force, it will return. Then place a ligature and suture on it and tighten it. As for its side that faces the incision and connects to it, it should not be cut except in the vagina. If it is cut, it should be stitched back and prepared as we have mentioned before and what suits you.
Then place a ligature and suture on it and tighten it. The patient should be instructed to press the wound and keep it pressed until it stops bleeding. With this treatment, if the side of the incision separates from its place, it will return to its position.
Chapter 6 and 20.
On the treatment of wound separation.
Know that a wound can separate in three ways: first, it can separate towards the belly button downwards; second, it can separate towards the chest; and third, it can separate above the wound, but this occurs only in the vagina.
And a wound does not separate towards the back near the armpit or towards the front near the shoulder, and it usually separates and comes out downwards towards the belly button, especially in those with less fat as it comes out quickly from them and enters quickly.
As for those with numerous veins, it signifies that he will exit through an incision and enter through an incision. It may be misleading to some people due to a blow or fall causing a twitch or a warm swelling, which might lead them to believe that he has been injured. However, it is necessary to verify this until the truth is established.
When he is to be treated, the injury will become evident if it is below the navel and it touches the inflamed vein and the healthy one. You will find a difference between them externally, and you will find the head of the injured vein with a hole and under the navel when touched, the head of the injured vein feels like a hard ball.
The paralysis cannot make him raise his hand to the ear nor move it in all movements, and likewise if the injury is around the chest or above, you will find that clearly by touch which cannot be hidden.
This paralysis can be cured if it is dry or if the patient is a child. To cure it, you should place your hand under his navel and raise the affected part forcefully to its position above with the servant raising his hand and stretching it above.
Then he puts it below and it returns quickly; if it does not return as mentioned, and it has been a long time since the bite happened, it is necessary to investigate the cause in hot water and use a leech that draws and lets blood like boiling onions, garlic, and licorice in hot water and use it.
Then the cause is placed on its surface and a ball made of moderately strong cotton is put under it, then the physician places his finger in the hole of the ball and holds the cause with his hand and lets it fall down.
The ball is pushed with the foot; it returns to its place, and if you wish to return it to this side and it is necessary that a man taller than the cause stands by his side and stops him from one side and enters from below the cotton of the cause and lifts the cotton above until the cause is hanging in the air. The last attendant attracts the cause's hand to below with his stomach, if the cause is light, it is necessary to attach something else to it to make it heavier because the bite returns in its time; it may also return on another side.
The translation is: "Place a long stick with its head shaped like the end of a hawk's beak, neither too heavy nor too light, under the patient after placing an incision on the stick, then the patient and the stick remain in position for the length of the stick.
"Then move your hand to the opposite side and push the body from the other side with force, so that the dislocation returns quickly to its place. If it does not return, use this treatment which is to take a stick of similar length as the arm. "Present it (the arm) with a length of four fingers and thicken it to two fingers, with a head shaped for easy insertion into the incision in the thigh on this figure:
"Then tie a smooth incision on the pointed end to prevent the stick from hurting the patient, then he should press down under the thigh and pull both the hand and arm towards the stick, tying the stick to the limb and using assistance and pressure on the side of the hand.
"Then place the arm on a flat surface. Align it and move the hand downwards, leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side so that the dislocation enters from any direction. If it enters on one side, a ball made of yarn should be placed under the thigh to balance the pressure.
Then, he should load the plaster made from the embers of the mill with lime and white of egg on all sides while it is being turned from above. Then, he should press the ball from below the sheep's bladder firmly and smoothly, and rotate the bandage over it from above and attach his hand to its neck.
He should leave his hand immobile for seven days, and it is preferable to reduce the patient's food intake until the limb strengthens, as it heals faster. Then, after seven or five days, he should start moving it. If it remains fixed without any pain, then it has been cured.
If the severed part continues to ooze frequently due to moisture or another reason, it is necessary to use three astringents in each opening of the wound, as this prevents infection. After seven days have passed and the bandage has been removed, if the severed part does not heal.
If the bandage and pressure are applied to it multiple times but do not heal, if it falls off and causes pain and is unable to be raised above, know that the severed part in the end of the limb has been cut or stretched or injured. Know this when the severed part does not heal in its place forever.
If a fracture occurs near the jaw, chest, and back, it should be reduced by using pressure and pulling with hands until it returns to its original position. All kinds of force and treatment should be applied until it heals. If after reduction, the limb appears deformed and stiff in movement.
The cauterizing iron should not be applied repeatedly until the deformity disappears and it returns to its original state.
Chapter Seven and Forty.
Treatment of Fracture Dislocation.
When dislocating a fracture, it should be dislocated forcefully and likewise returned forcefully. It dislocates in all directions, and it is not hidden from you that this occurs beneath the sight and touch in any form.
If a fracture dislocation is correctly set, it will be clearly indicated by the swelling at the site of the fracture and it will not be able to bend or touch the affected limb. It is important that you should try to move the fracture from your side before exposing it to heat and cold.
If exposed to heat and cold, it will be difficult to move the fracture and most likely it will not heal. If the fracture is at the back, it will cause more pain and frequently accompanied by death.
If a finger can be manipulated to return to its place with the hand and arm relaxed, and the physician applies pressure from above and below, he should push the separated part either with all his fingers or with the tip of his thumb until it returns to its original position.
If a tooth is loose, the hand should be squeezed until the tip of the thumb touches it, and if it does not return to its place, exert strong pressure with both hands, making the arms act like a pliers.
The assistant should hold both hands to prevent it from slipping during manipulation, then the arm is rotated in all directions after striking its palm with a wad of cotton or a thin cloth. If the physician pushes the separated part with his hand, he should anoint it with oil so that it can be easily retracted.
The separated part should be pushed back forcefully until it returns, and after its return, a bandage should be applied to it with a plaster that has been dried and whitened with egg white, and the arm is tightly bound from the neck of the assistant and left for some days.
Then, if it (the separation) is firm in its place, unloosen the sutures from it and leave it, but if you see that the separation has not worsened, prepare the suture and the sutures again and leave it for days until it does worsen, then unloosen it. If something similar happens to him after the separation returns and it is unloosened.
If it (the wound) becomes tight in movement, do not manipulate the wound in the bath and use gentle massage and tapping until it softens or apply warm oil on the separation then suture it and leave it for a day and night then remove it and put him in the bath, if it swells, make an incision on the separation with a balanced force.
Then, make an incision on him multiple times and the second and third time with entry to the bath until it softens, if you wish, put wet wool soaked in oil on him and apply pressure on it several times, for it will soften and return to its original state.
The eighth and tenth (sections).
On the treatment of fractures.
A fracture of the hand is often difficult to reduce and set, but it is necessary to hasten the reduction of the fracture in the hour when it occurs before the place is exposed or heated.
The servant should apply pressure on the wound with a flat piece of bone, and the physician shall place his hand on the separated part and push it back, unless it is necessary to ensure that the fracture has returned to the inside of the hand.
The wound should be covered with a flat piece of bone, and the fracture shall protrude outward if it is on the surface of the hand. In such a case, the physician's palm shall be placed on the same side as the fracture, and if it returns to its place, no additional pressure is needed; otherwise, it should be compressed with a splint for pain relief.
Leave it alone and do not try to reset it as it is unlikely to be reset after several days, unless the fracture remains on a curve and causes no harm to the hand except for swelling, in which case it would not be possible to grasp anything.
If the bone is broken or dislocated, there is no solution except to compress it firmly, although this may or may not be helpful; if the fracture has been reset, apply a splint as described earlier, then compress and wait for five days.
Then soften and exercise the hand, if it seizes up or shows something abnormal. Wash it with hot water and massage repeatedly until it becomes soft.
The ninth and tenth sections.
On the treatment of finger dislocations.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, and if it gets dislocated towards the back of the hand or inside, extend the finger and apply pressure on the joint until it returns to its place, then tie the end of the finger and bind it towards the side it was dislocated to.
Leave it for a couple of days, then release and stretch it until it adjusts to its normal state during the day. If it is night-time, bind it according to the same method without ceasing to soften and exercise it by movement, and bind it at night until it improves. Do this for as many days as necessary until it strengthens.
And likewise, treat it if it gets dislocated towards the inside of the hand by binding it towards the same side and perform the same actions until it escapes, and likewise do the same if it gets dislocated in any other direction.
The thirty-third section.
On the treatment of cervical dislocation.
When the fissure occurs in the back or neck vertebrae, or when many hernias leave their places, there is no cure because death hastens towards the ill one.
A sign of this is when the pus (brz) comes out without intention and one cannot stop it, frequently spurting from some of his limbs either arms or legs or one of them, and if a hernia (khirzah) leaves its place, then it often becomes incurable.
The hernia (khirzah) can become incurable in four directions; if it occurs at the back, it is called a "herniated disc" (hadbah). Its treatment is that one should observe if the herniated disc has occurred from an injury or not. If it has occurred from an injury, then there is no cure for it nor any relief of pain (br'at al-batthah), but if it occurs due to a fall or similar circumstances, then...
The initial descriptions of the hernia (khirzah) in long speech have no more benefit than what I have conveyed briefly from it, explaining and clarifying its meaning and depicting the instrument contrary to what has been clarified and explained.
I say that the abscess, which occurs in front of the chest, has no remedy or relief from it, and similarly, the one on both sides (flanks). However, treatment is only applicable for the abscess occurring in the back, as I have described it, and this is to press on its surface.
On a level surface close to the wall, spread some moist material so as not to harm its chest then place an upright wooden piece in a hole on one side of the surface near its head and another wooden piece on the other side of the surface near its feet.
A servant holds the wooden piece and keeps it firm in the hole, while another servant holds the other one in place in this position. Then, they strike the patient's chest and cover him with a soft, durable cloth and tie its edge to the wooden piece that is near his head.
Then, the other cloth is shaken over and across his back and over his buttocks and neck, then all the ropes are gathered and tied together at the second wooden piece that is near his feet. Each servant pulls the rope towards their respective wooden piece without letting the wooden pieces move from their fixed positions.
Except that he does not press his hand firmly on the bladder until it returns, or he places a flat stone on it then remains on the stone with his feet until it returns, for if it does not return with this treatment, he takes a flat stone whose length is about three spans.
He carves a hole in the wall that is near the patient, and places one edge of the flat stone into it, then he positions the center of the stone on the bladder and the physician places his feet on the other edge, and he presses hard until he feels the bladder being pressed.
It returns to its place, and if you wish to make it with the hands, you can hang two wooden poles of a span each near the patient at the end of the room, and also place two poles at his feet in the same way.
It should be between each wooden pole a distance of two fingers, and he makes a hole in each pole where the catheter will pass, and he embeds all the poles into the ground so that the bladder does not move and a rotating catheter is inserted into the holes in the wooden poles.
On one side of the wound, a splint has been inserted that measures about one cubit, and in the other two wooden pieces similar to it, then tighten the bandage that you have tied around the handle at the top of the syringe and the bands that you have tied around its neck.
Then, stand beside each syringe with an assistant who shakes his hand with the syringe filled with the contents. The physician adjusts the plunger to the required amount and this is a picture of the syringe, needle, and handle.
Then, after the incision is made and the position has returned to normal, it is necessary to place the dry cotton soaked in egg white, followed by the suturing. From above the cotton, a strip of wood must be placed that is about three fingers wide or similar and long enough to contain the wound.
On some of the correct sutures, then tie the bandage as desired and use the mild food until it softens, if any pus remains in the wound at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to use the medicines that heal and soothe with the use of the wood strip described earlier for a long time.
In that, a lead sheet is used, and it may expose an ulcer at the end of the backbone, thinking it is a protruding bone; however, do not expose yourself to this treatment, for it might possibly cause death.
Chapter One, Thirty.
Treatment of the Herniated Vertebra.
Know that the intervertebral disc and interarticular disc only expose to a fracture, but they do not expose to any of the other types of soft injuries such as ruptures or compressions. The intervertebral disc protrudes on four sides.
That is because it protrudes inside and outside, towards front and back, and it mostly protrudes more towards the inside than towards the front or back. A sign of a disc protrusion towards the inside is that if you feel for the patient's pulse on the correct side, it will be longer.
The hernia is more painful than the correct position, and it is not possible for the patient to raise his leg among the Arabs (i.e., Bedouins), and it is obvious that the place where the big toe is pointing towards is the location.
A sign of a fracture that exposes to the outside is different from these symptoms, and a sign of a fracture that exposes to the front is that it spreads the leg completely, but it does not shorten it unless there is pain in the hernia, and walking is impossible for him at this location towards the front.
The wound is stopped and the urine is pressed out, and when walking it becomes discharged at the posterior part. The sign of one who exposes his buttock to such a thing is that he does not widen the saddle nor can he bend it before bending the buttocks, and his gait is also shorter than the others.
The buttocks are contracted, and the head of the penis is located at the site of the injury. As for the kinds of this affliction, if this fistula has been affecting its owner for a long time without him attempting to cure it, there is no treatment for the abscess.
It is not advisable to expose oneself to it, and as for the one who has been fistulated in any of the four openings of the anus, he must wash the affected area well, move it gently inward and outward until softened.
He returned and did not require any other treatment, but if he does not return in this way, it is necessary to summon a strong servant with his hands or ropes that are tied on his buttocks above the saddle and a second servant pulls him from below.
The hand should enter from beneath the navel, then it shall be tightened by thin thread on the root of the finger and an assistant holds one end of the thread. It may extend either from the front side to the back or from the rear to the chest.
All of them shall be drawn out in one movement until the object rises from the earth and remains suspended, for this type of extraction is a shared characteristic among the four types. If the object returns as we have said or otherwise, it is necessary for each type to use the treatment that was specifically mentioned.
If the object is inside, it should be pulled out on its correct side. Then a cord should be tied around the root of the finger between the tip and the navel area.
Then the cord should be pulled up from the navel side to the upper body towards the back, and an assistant holds it firmly with his hands. He grasps the thickened part of the finger with his hand and pulls out the object forcefully. It will return to its original position.
This type is easier than other methods of treatment that involve this joint, but if it is difficult for you and you do not need to perform this type of treatment, then all the limbs of the object should be tied with thin cords at the elbows and knees.
After each of them (the fingers), there should be a span of four fingers, and the index finger (small) should be extended more than the other one by two fingers' width. Then, he (the patient) ties the affected (index finger) to a wooden peg that is in the house, and there should be two arm lengths after it on the ground.
Then, he commands a strong boy to hold the head of the finger and tie it with the affected (index finger). Another boy then holds the finger being tied and pushes it forcefully. The separation (between the fingers) returns quickly to its place, unless the jaw moves outwards.
The affected (index finger) should be placed on the window sill as previously described in the case of the club foot, and the rope should be tied tightly around it and to its joint and chest. Then, two wooden pieces are placed under his legs and one at his head, and a large piece of wood is placed in the middle of the window sill as a support.
A moist warm poultice should be placed on it so as not to harm the affected (index finger), and a piece of wood should be placed between his fingers to prevent it from moving downwards during the procedure, then each attendant should go to their side and the physician straightens the ropes if he responds to the treatment.
Except that it is placed upon him, and it is tied on what we mentioned in the cavity; except that it is necessary that the injury be on his correct side. And if the extraction is towards the front, it is necessary that the finger be withdrawn one time, and he is described thus with his eye on the thumb.
The physician places his left hand on the injured finger, then presses it with the other hand while applying constant pressure towards the bottom (palm side) of the finger. If extraction is towards the back, it should not be pulled downward.
It should be raised above the ground but it is necessary that it be secured on something hard, also it should be from both its tip and root according to what we mentioned of the injury on the thumb. And it is closed (bound) with ties.
According to what we said, the splinter should be applied with a knife on the spot where it has exited. If the tip of the finger has completely returned, its sign will not escape your notice and is indicated by the finger being withdrawn (straightened).
If you see them both in line and the finger is contracted but not constricted, know that it has returned to its normal state. In this case, tie the fingers together and apply a thick bandage tightly so that the finger does not move to any of the directions.
The patient must be immobilized. The sutures and bindings shall be loosened after three or four days, then the wound shall be sewn with the other [side], if you see both in good condition, know that the fracture has set, release the immobilizer and let the patient walk, but if you see anything of swelling.
Return and bind it again as you did before, then leave it for three days, then open it up and let him walk on it for as long as necessary until it heals, God willing.
The second and third sections.
Treatment of fractures.
A fracture occurs in three directions, internally, externally, and downwards, meaning towards the back and not towards the front of the buttock, and a sign of a fracture is that the patient orders the immobilizer to hold his leg onto the side of the boot.
If he does not hold his leg onto the side of the boot, then know that the fracture is not displaced, force all sides of the fracture to make him sit down and if he can do so, let him sit with his assistant behind him to support him and guide him slightly from behind, then you sit on his feet.
Place the posterior (back) of your hand upon your face, and let the leg of the scalpel be between your fingers. Then grasp it with your fingers and interlock them on the handle. After that, draw it strongly to the side of the handle with your fist and another assistant shall push the leg until the handle returns to its place.
The sign that it has returned is when the tip of the scalpel touches the bone, then press and attach the tip to the bone, then bind them together with three ligatures for three or four days, then release them. It shall not be used except by little walking for a few days until it heals.
If it is difficult for you to return it as we have described, then apply strong traction with the ligatures that we have previously mentioned in the treatment of the dislocation.
The third and thirty-third chapter.
On the treatment of the fracture of the skull.
The skull fracture may easily heal by itself or it may break completely and be displaced either internally or externally, and the sign of a fracture is that you see the skull bulging on the side to which it has been displaced.
As for the treatment of a simple healing, it is easy to reduce by hand and hold it until it returns, and as for the treatment if it breaks completely, the patient should sit upright and a strong assistant holds him from behind his back in the middle.
Then grasp your right hand at the top of its foot, and your left hand at the bottom of its foot in the position of the instep. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then stretch it with your left hand, push the heel of the foot with your right hand towards the big toe without force.
Then make the same action as described, then push the heel towards the big toe in the third pull and you are pulling at the instep. If it returns in one or two attempts with this characteristic and you see the foot flat, otherwise correct the work on it because it will return.
If it is prevented from returning as described, then place the heel on the ground and secure it firmly to the ground with a strong pressure between his feet so that it does not harm the heel, then the servant holds the foot.
Then the last servant of the man pulls him either by hand or by a rope tied around his neck, then each servant pulls in opposite directions and the body is held up between the feet of the heel to prevent it from falling during the stretching, then the doctor straightens the leg with his hands.
The last servant holds the correct vein towards the lower part; then, when the ligature returns quickly, if it returns and clarifies its correctness to you, take hold of the ligature and the knot and tighten it with thongs and thread, and apply your foot to the thongs downward. It is necessary that you be cautious from the blow that will be above the buttock from behind.
Do not let the thong be too tight, so as not to injure it, then leave it for a couple or three days if it swells. If the thong becomes swollen, tighten it, then release it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days.
If the patient walks before this period, it will not be safe for the ligature to hold and it will burst or rot, and treatment after that will not be accepted. If he limps with a hot swelling, it is necessary to use what has been described in another place of our treatise and refrain from walking until it subsides.
Fourth and Thirtieth Chapter.
Treatment of Ligature of Finger Veins in the Male.
It is necessary to fill up the wound left by ligature with a soft substance other than pus, and this is not difficult but easy; if the ligature is in some part of the foot's sole, it is necessary that the patient put his foot on a level place on the ground.
"And on a bone, and he stands like a mannequin, then you position your foot on the end of the bone, and press it with force until it returns and you see that it has been broken but does not appear in the position.
"Then put a splint under the foot bone so that it takes hold of the entire foot with two ends, then press it firmly and accurately for three days, then dissolve it and remove it from walking for several days until it hardens and ensures the return, if God wills.
"Chapter Fifty-Third
"In types of fractures that occur with injury or breakage, or both together.
"When such things occur and treatment is applied, it often ends in death.
"Therefore, it should not be attempted to treat such cases except by a skilled craftsman with long experience, sharp eyesight, good judgment, no deformity or dislocation, and the use of medicines that soothe inflammation alone, and he must be patient.
"O Allah, may you grant us safety from pain with mild sickness and give us some hope in it before the inflammation occurs.
If a limb returns as desired, apply the treatment that inhabits the hot abscesses and heals wounds with appropriate cauterization. If the fracture occurs along with a bone crack and free shards take place, extract them. Equivalent to what we mentioned in simple diseases, it proceeds in the cases presented.
Exert your effort and be cautious of entering the path of error on what you face, and follow my advice for that is best for you and submits to your presentation if God wills it.
